CITIZENSHIP
IN THE WORLD


CITIZENSHIP
IN THE WORLD
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Citizenship-In-The-World or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35872
ISBN 978-0-8395-3260-6
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing FPO


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 3


4 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
What Is Citizenship? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Comparative Political Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
National Interest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
The World Order of Nations. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
International Trade and Commerce . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
United Nations System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Global Issues, Watchdogs, and Advocates. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
International Law . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Representation Abroad . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Expand Your Own Borders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 7
.Introduction
Introduction
We don’t live in our own world. We share the planet with more
than 6 billion people. These people stare at the same sky, but
they see it from different positions: coral islands, desert dunes,
terraced mountains, rain forests, grasslands, and landlocked
megacities. And yet most of these people want the same things
we want: good health, personal security, and the freedoms to
worship as we please, speak what we think, choose our life-
styles, and elect our leaders.
We are more alike than we are different. The Declaration
of Independence defines the basic rights of people in the United
States—and everywhere else: “. . . that all men are created
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain
unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the
pursuit of Happiness.”
We might share the same planet with the more than 6 billion
people worldwide, but we don’t share the same rights, freedoms,
or opportunities.


8 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Introduction.
The difference is that many people outside the United
States are not allowed to exercise their natural rights. Today the
world is connected through communications networks on the
ocean floor, on the ground, in outer space, and in cyberspace.
The internet and television allow people all over the globe to
get information previously inaccessible. We can now see wars
fought in real time. We talk online in chat rooms full of people
who share specific interests, yet live in different countries.
We watch breaking news and live performances on TV.
People tend to interpret the impact of international events
from their own cultural or national perspective. But as global
trade increases, as nations form regional economic and military
alliances, and as activists point out human rights abuses and
environmental damage, citizens and governments worldwide
must recognize that we are living interdependently. The easy
access to instant information makes the world a smaller place
and challenges our views about other nations. What we do and
don’t do affects the world, and the world affects us.
As you earn the Citizenship in the World merit badge,
you will discover that you are already a citizen of the world.
How good a citizen you are depends on your willingness to
understand and appreciate the values, traditions, and concerns
of people in other countries—in our world.
Before you surf the internet to learn
more about the world, be sure you
have your parent’s permission.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 9
.Introduction





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 11
.What Is Citizenship?
What Is Citizenship?
Citizenship is membership in a governed community. This
membership comes with a set of privileges, freedoms, and duties,
which varies according to the nation’s form of government.
A person may acquire citizenship in different ways:
• “By blood” if born to parents who are already citizens of
a nation
• “By soil” if born within the legal borders of a nation
• Through naturalization
• Through naturalization of parents
A citizen is a native or naturalized person who owes
allegiance to a specific nation and is entitled to its government’s
protection. A subject is a citizen ruled by a sovereign authority,
such as a monarch, and is required to show loyalty to both the
ruling authority and the nation.
Ultimately, the quality of citizenship depends on the bal-
ance between what a government does for the people and what
it expects of them in return.
United States Citizenship
Under most forms of government, citizens are obligated to obey
the law, pay taxes, and serve in the armed forces; the govern-
ment is obligated to provide physical safety, public services,
and protection of property. In the United States, the government
must protect other rights and freedoms as well:
• Right to vote
• Right to a fair trial
• Right to bear arms
• Freedom of religion
• Freedom of speech
• Freedom of the press
Naturalization is
the legal process
by which an alien,
or foreign-born
person, becomes
a citizen.


12 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
What Is Citizenship?.
In a sense, a citizen’s duties are built into these rights
and freedoms. The right to a free trial, for example, obligates
U.S. citizens to serve on juries. The right to vote obligates them
to be informed about important issues and the candidates’
positions. Because the government rules with the consent of
the citizens, Americans must understand and exercise their
constitutional rights—or risk losing them.
Permanent Residence
U.S. citizens live in an open society where it is safe to think out
loud. We freely express our opinions, exchange ideas, and even
disagree in public. But in some nations, people are not allowed
to do so.
Modern communications such as electronic mail and global
broadcasting have advanced the spread of American popular
culture. Through advertising, music, and movies shown world-
wide, as well as humanitarian outreach efforts and international
trade, people in most countries no longer have to depend on
The Declaration of Independence is a unique contract
between citizens and government: “. . . Governments
are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers
from the consent of the governed. . . .”
In the United States, serving on a jury when called is a civic duty;
it is also one way that the right to a free trial is protected.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 13
.What Is Citizenship?
their government for information about the world beyond their
own borders. Now they can find out for themselves about what
it is like to live in the United States.
People emigrate, or leave their own countries to settle
elsewhere, for various reasons including fear of persecution, the
desire to be reunited with family, and the opportunity to better
themselves economically. U.S. Citizenship and Immigration
Services, under the direction of the Department of Homeland
Security, issues immigrant visas to qualified foreign nationals,
or aliens, who wish to become lawful permanent residents
(LPRs) of the United States.
As an LPR, an immigrant enjoys certain rights, including
the right to
• Stay in the United States indefinitely.
• Have a job.
• Sponsor certain family members for immigration.
An LPR must pay taxes but may not vote. Only citizens
have that right. Many people who choose to become U.S.
An immigrant visa
is an identification
card that allows
a nonnative
person to stay in
the United States
permanently.
Many people who immigrate to the United States do so for
political and religious freedom.


14 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
What Is Citizenship?.
citizens want to fully participate in American society, elect
government leaders, and have a voice in domestic and foreign
policies.
To apply for U.S. residency, an immigrant must complete
the I–485 form, Application to Register Permanent Residence or
Adjust Status, available online at www.uscis.gov/i-485, and
submit many required supporting documents.
Naturalization
An applicant for citizenship must have a valid immigrant visa,
must have fulfilled residency requirements, must be prepared to
demonstrate an understanding of the English language, and
must know the basics of the United States’s history and how its
government works.
After satisfying the examiner at the naturalization interview
and passing the English and civics tests, an immigrant must
take the oath of allegiance. The applicant swears to
• Support the Constitution and obey the laws of the United
States.
• Renounce, or give up, any foreign allegiance.
• Bear arms for the armed forces of the United States or
perform services for the United States government
when required.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 15
.What Is Citizenship?
After taking the oath, the immigrant receives a certificate
of naturalization, which is proof of U.S. citizenship, and may
then apply for a U.S. passport.
Becoming an official U.S. citizen is a long and difficult
process requiring life-changing decisions and actions.
Immigrants who do this know why they want to live in the
United States and take nothing for granted. They might know
more about U.S. government and history than people whose
families have been citizens for generations.
World Citizenship
Nations are like stand-alone colored tiles, each with its own
design. Each one has a beauty all its own, resulting from
combinations of elements including ethnic customs, social
values, language, religion, and legal systems. Together, nations
form a complex pattern—a world mosaic.
Each person is not only a citizen of his or her nation, but
also a citizen of the world. As such, we all have a responsibility
to respect cultural diversity and the rights of other governments.
For the sake of international security, we must understand a
nation’s relationship to other nations, as well as its citizens’
relationship to one another. Then we must cooperate for the
good of all.


16 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
What Is Citizenship?.
The United Nations and other international organizations
track information about how countries care for their citizens. In
a rich nation where the wealth is not concentrated in the hands
of a few, citizens can expect to live a long and healthy life, get
educated, exercise equal rights under the law, and access
resources needed for a decent standard of living.
In poor countries, citizens tend to die younger due to
malnutrition, preventable diseases, and civil war. The people
have little access to good health care, safe drinking water,
education, paved roads, electricity, and communication with
the world beyond their villages.
When we judge how other nations respect or violate values
such as freedom, equality, justice, privacy, and human dignity,
we must judge our own national character as well. How well
do we deal with racism, sexism, and cultural bias inside and
outside our borders? Being a good world citizen requires
speaking out and taking action against violations of human
rights.
Gross domestic product, or GDP, is the monetary value
of all final goods (such as cars, clothing, and houses)
and services (such as dog grooming, concert tickets,
and doctor visits) produced within a country in a specific
period of time. A large GDP per person generally indi-
cates a high standard of living and better quality of life.
Although GDP is considered the best measure of a
nation’s economic health, it doesn’t accurately reflect the
distribution of income among the country’s population.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 17
.What Is Citizenship?
Most democratic governments consider suffrage
(the right to vote) a right of citizenship. Many think
that participation in elections is a civic responsibility.
Some think it is a duty and make voting compulsory,
or required. Nonvoters may be penalized or fined.
Do you think forcing citizens to vote will yield election
results that reflect the will of the people?





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 19
.Comparative Political Systems
Comparative
Political Systems
As nations become more interdependent, people struggle
to make sense of the changes and movements taking place
throughout the world. Widespread access to information has
raised awareness about the effects of the global economy,
terrorism, religious extremism, famines, widespread diseases,
and the collapse of governments. Education leads to under-
standing, tolerance, and peace.
Power to Rule
A government comes to rule through inheritance, revolution,
or election. What form a government takes depends on who
has sovereignty, or the supreme authority and power to
make, implement, and enforce laws, and settle disputes
about those laws.
The basic forms of government are:
• Autocracy. Unlimited power to govern is in the hands of one
ruler: a monarch, dictator, or military or religious leader.
• Oligarchy. Unlimited power to govern is in the hands of a
few persons or a minority: a single political party, junta,
or self-appointed elite (as a group of emirs).
• Democracy. Unlimited power to govern is in the hands of
the majority of a country’s citizens.
• Republic. Limited power to govern is in the hands of
elected representatives.


20 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Comparative Political Systems.
A theocracy is a
government ruled
by one or more
religious leaders
who believe they
have divine
authority. A junta
(pronounced
HOON-ta) is a
group of
persons—often
a military leader
backed by the
nation’s armed
forces—who
control a
government after
seizing power. An
emir is the ruler of
an Islamic nation.
Often, people interchange certain terms such as democ-
racy and republic to describe a specific form of govern-
ment, even though the words have different meanings.
Democracy means “power of the people,” or “govern-
ment of, by, and for the people.” Generally, it refers to
the fact that the citizens—not the rulers or leaders—
hold the sovereign power. Democracy depends on
majority rule.
A direct democracy is rule by the majority of citi-
zens, which only works on a small scale. For example,
eligible citizens vote on local issues in mass meetings
and the people’s will becomes public policy. At the
national level, however, a direct democracy is impracti-
cal because every eligible voter would have the right
(and responsibility) to vote on every issue, from widen-
ing a highway to changing the structure of a national
health care system. In a representative democracy, the
people’s will is expressed indirectly through elected
representatives, with the will of the majority controlling
public policy.
The framers of the U.S. Constitution wanted to
make sure that the will of the majority would never
oppress the rights of the individual citizen or minority.
To restrain the excesses of democracy, the founding
fathers structured a republic—a form of representative
government that guarantees the protection of the indi-
vidual’s God-given “unalienable rights” and freedoms
by limiting the power of majority rule. As a citizen
and a Scout, you “pledge allegiance to the flag of the
United States of America and to the republic for which
it stands. . . .”


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 21
.Comparative Political Systems
Usually, power is limited by a written constitution, which
is the fundamental law of a nation. It describes the purposes of
the government, defines the rights of the people, explains how
leaders are elected and how long they can hold office, and
defines and limits the powers of the leaders. In countries with
constitutions, both the people and the government act in accor-
dance with a uniform set of legal provisions.
Some nations, such as the United Kingdom, depend on
uncodified constitutions, which are based on written sources
(like the Magna Carta) as well as laws, precedents, and customs.
Unlike a written constitution, which summarizes the basic law
in a single document, the uncodified constitution is an under-
standing of how the government should work based on certain
legal documents, traditions, and laws upheld over time.
Le Havre
Inverness
Lerwick
Plymouth
Galway
Londonderry
Bristol
Dover
Swansea
Torshavn
Cork
Limerick
Waterford
Edinburgh
Leeds
Leicester
Manchester
Sunderland
Belfast
Birmingham
Glasgow
Liverpool
Paris
Dublin
London
FRANCE
Faroe Islands
H e b r i d e s
Orkney Islands
Shetland Islands
Loire
Seine
Seine
N o r t h
S e a
English Channel
A t l a n t i c
O c e a n
0˚5˚W0˚W
50˚N
55˚N
60˚N
ENGLAND
NORTHERN
IRELAND
SCOTLAND
WALES
IRELAND
United Kingdom


22 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Comparative Political Systems.
Constitutional Governments
Most constitutional governments in the world today are
representative democracies, such as the Taiwanese and
Ethiopian governments. Taiwan has an elected president,
a unicameral (one-house) legislature, and four main
political parties. The Federal Democratic Republic of
Ethiopia has been an independent nation for at least
2,000 years. Its government consists of an elected
president, a bicameral (two-house) parliament, and
several political parties. Some governments that were
once nonconstitutional and ruled by absolute monarchs
are now constitutional monarchies. In the United
Kingdom, for example, the queen is primarily a figure-
head, and the real political power lies with the bicameral
parliament and the prime minister.
Manado
Samarinda
Rabaul
Iloilo
ong Khai
Banjarmasin
Jayapura
Kupang
Pontianak
Lae
Madang
Wewak
Bacolod
Baguio
Cagayan De Oro
Laoag
Zamboanga
Can Tho
Da Nang
Vinh
Changsha
Chongqing
Fuzhou
Guangzhou
Guiyang
Jingdezhen
Nanning
Ningbo
Pingxiang
Shang Rao
Shantou
Shaoguan
Wenzhou
Xiamen
Zhanjiang
Surabaya
Kaohsiung
Taipei
Hai Phong
Ho Chi Minh City
Nanchang
YueyangZigong
Bandung
mbang
Semarang
Ujungpandang
Davao
Quezon City
Agana
Hong Kong
Jakarta
Phnom Penh
ntiane
la Lumpur
Saipan
Kokor
Manila
Singapaore
Bandar Seri Begawan
Port Moresby
Hanoi
CHINA
LAND
KAMPUCHEA
VIETNAM
IA
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
BRUNEI
SINGAPORE
PHILIPPINES
TAIWAN
MALAYSIA
I N D O N E S I A
Admiralty Islands
Aru
Bali
Bismarck
Archipelago
Borneo
Celebes
Flores
Guam
Halmahera
Java
Luzon
Mindanao
Natuna
New Britain
New Guinea
New Irela
Palau Islands
Palawan
Samar
Seram
Sumba
Sumbawa
Tanimbar
Timor
Jinsha R.
Mekong
Mekong
Yangtze
A r a f u r a S e a
Celebes Sea
E a s t C h i n a S e a
J a v a S e a
Philippine Sea
Solomon Sea
S o u t h C h i n a S e a
Formosa Str.
Gulf of Tonkin
Makasar Strait
Torres Str.
P A C I F I C
O C E A N
105˚E 110˚E 115˚E 120˚E 125˚E 130˚E 135˚E 140˚E 145˚E 150˚E 15
Beni Suef
Dire Dawa
Ioannina
Patrai
Al Jawf
Bangassou
Ndele
Aswan
Port Said
El-Minya
Suez
Aseb
Asela
Goba
Mekele
Iraklion
Khania
Larisa
Ardabil
Bakhtaran
Bandar
Ke
Eldoret
Kisumu
Mombasa
Banghazi
Al Khal
Salalah
Medina
Mecca
Berbera
Chisimayu
Hargeysa
Al Fashir
Atbarah
Juba
Port Sudan
Waw
Mbeya
Mwanza
Tabora Tanga
Antalya
Gulu
Al Ghaydan
Al Mukalla
Taizz
Bukavu
Bumba
Kalemi
Kamina
Kananga
Kisangani
Agrinion
Esfahan
Shiraz
Tabriz
Basra
Mosel
Damascus
Aleppo
Adana
Izmir
Alexandria
Al Manamah
Bujumbura
Djibouti
Asmara
Addis Abbaba
Athens
Tehran
Baghdad
Amman
Nairobi
Kuwait
Musc
Ad Dawhah
Kigali
Riyadh
Mogadishu
Dar es Salaam
Ankara
Ashkhab
Abu Dhabi
Sanaa
Nicosia
Cairo
Tel Aviv
Beirut
Khartoum
Kampala
T U R K E Y
GREECE
CYPRUS
K E N Y A
E T H I O P I A
ERITREA
S U D A N
E G Y P T
S O M A L I A
L I B Y A
C H A D
T A N Z A N I A
CENTRAL
AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
UGANDA
B U R U N D I
RWANDA
C O N G O
DJIBOUTI
JORDAN
ISRAEL
LEBANON
KUWAIT
QATAR
BAHRAIN
U. A. E.
Y E M E N
SYRIA
I R A Q
I R A N
Crete
Lesbos
Peloponnesus
Rhodes
Suqutra
Zanzibar Island
Dead Sea
L. Kivu
L. Malawi
L. Tanganyika
L. Tuz
L. Van
Lake
Victoria
Lake Albert
Lake
Mweru
Lake
Nasser
Lake Turkana
Blue Nile
Congo R.
Congo R.
Euphrates R.
Euphrates R.
Kasai R.
Nile R.
Nile R.
Tigris R.
Tigris R.
Ubangi R.White Nile
Aegean Sea
Caspian Sea
Gulf of Aden
Persian
Gulf
Mediterranean Sea
Red Sea
25˚E 30˚E 35˚E 40˚E 45˚E 50˚E 55˚E
25˚E 30˚E 35˚E 40˚E 45˚E 50˚E 55˚E
5˚N
0˚
10˚N
15˚N
20˚N
25˚N
30˚N
35˚N
5˚S
5000
0
Parallel scale a
I N D I A N
O C E A N
S A U D I
A R A B I A
Taiwan Ethiopia


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 23
.Comparative Political Systems
Constitutional Governments
Many nations with constitutions are not necessarily constitu-
tional governments. Even when a government is established
and defined by a constitution, the leader or leaders may act as
if they are not bound by it. For example, leaders may use secret
police or a personal army to profit themselves, their families, or
their friends. In order to be considered constitutional, a govern-
ment must meet three requirements. It must be limited in its
power, follow a higher law, and have constitutional stability.
Limited Power. The concept of limited government,
also called the rule of law, holds that the government and its
officers may not exceed the limits of their power. They are
subject to—and never above—the law. If they violate the law,
the constitution specifies ways to remove them from office.
For example, the Constitution of the United States declares
that presidents who do not obey its laws can be impeached
and removed from office.
Higher Law. In a constitutional government,
the constitution is considered the highest law of the
land. It has two important characteristics.
1. Individual rights are protected
from infringement by the
government and other people.
For example, citizens are
protected against illegal search
and seizure.
2. It provides limitations on power.
This is achieved by separating powers
through checks and balances.
Constitutional Stability. The constitution cannot be
changed without the consent of citizens and without using
well-known established amendment procedures.


24 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Comparative Political Systems.
Nonconstitutional Governments
Even though a nation may call itself a “democratic
republic,” this does not mean that the actual govern-
ment in practice is constitutional. This is the case
with the Democratic People’s Republic of North Korea,
where Kim Jong Un rules as a Communist dictator.
The late Fidel Castro had a similar role for more than
30 years in Communist Cuba, where the only political
party is the Partido Comunista de Cuba (Cuban
Communist Party). Nonconstitutional governments also
exist in nations such as Saudi Arabia, which is run by
an absolute monarchy.Hailar
Choybalsan
Baguio
Laoag
Chita
Khabarovsk
Niigata
Komsomolsk
Benxi
Changsha
Dalian
Dandong
Feng Cheng
Fushun
Fuzhou
uangzhou
Harbin
Huangshi
Jiaxing
Jilin
Jingdezhen
Jixi
Kaifeng
Liaoyuan
Nanjing
Ningbo
Pingxiang
Qingdao
Qiqihar
Shang Rao
Shanghai
Shantou
oguan
Shijiazhuang
Taian
Tangshan
Wenzhou
Wuxi
Xiamen
Xuzhou
Yingkou
Zaozhuang
Zhangjiakou
ng
Fukuoka
Hiroshima
Nagoya
Osaka
Vladivostok
Pusan
Taegu
Taejeon
Kaohsiung
Taipei
Changchun
tong
Fuxin
Handan
Hangzhou
Hefei
ohhot
Huaibei
Huainan
Huzhou
Jinan
Jinzhou
g
Nanchang
n
Tianjin
Wuhan
Wuhu
ang
Kita-kyushu
Kyoto
Sakai-minato
Incheon
Hong Kong
Pyongyang
Seoul
Beijing
Tokyo
PHILIPPINES
SOUTH KOREA
NORTH KOREA
JAPAN
Honshu
Kyushu
Luzon
Shikoku
Taiwan
Hulun Nur
Amur
Amur
Amur
Huang Ha
Huang Ha
Yangtze
Yangtze
E a s t
C h i n a
S e a
S e a
o f
J a p a n
t h C h i n a S e a
Yellow Sea
Formosa Str. P a c i f i c
O c e a n
115˚E 120˚E 125˚E 130˚E 135˚E
115˚E 120˚E 125˚E 130˚E 135˚E
20˚N
25˚N
30˚N
35˚N
40˚N
45˚N
50˚N
500 KM0
500 Miles0
Parallel scale at 40˚N 0˚E
CHINA
North Korea Cuba


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 25
.Comparative Political Systems
Nonconstitutional Governments
An authoritarian government—in which the authority to
rule is concentrated in the hands of an autocratic leader or
an oligarchy—acts arbitrarily. Neither constitutionally bound
nor responsible to the people, the government rules without
restraint or limitations. It remains in control as long as it
pleases, or until it is overthrown.
Authoritarian governments are not always heavy-handed.
In certain cases, a leader may rule as a benevolent dictator,
acting for the good of the people. However, an extreme form
of authoritarianism is totalitarian government. This oppressive
form of ruling power controls every aspect of life.
Distribution of Power
In a unitary government, often called a central government,
all the powers of the government are held by a single central
source, such as a dictator, single political party or ruling group
(the Communist Party or junta, for example), or parliament.
Local governments have only those powers given to them by
the central government. Those powers may be taken away at
any time.
A unitary government is not always a dictatorship. In a
unitary government such as the one in the United Kingdom,
all the powers held by the government are concentrated in
the parliament, yet those powers are limited.
A federal government is based on the division of powers
between a national government and several local governments.
An authority superior to both the national and local govern-
ments (usually a written constitution) describes the powers des-
ignated to each level. Both levels of government act directly on
the people according to their own laws, officials, and agencies.
Neither level of government acting on its own may change the
division of powers.
Big Brother is watching you. In his book 1984, George
Orwell writes about a fictional dictatorship that kept
its people under constant surveillance. The term Big
Brother now refers to any ruler or government that
invades the privacy of its citizens.


26 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Comparative Political Systems.
Relationship Between Executive and
Legislative Branches
A presidential government is based on the separation of
powers between the executive and legislative branches. The
branches are independent of each other and coequal. The chief
executive (president) is elected apart from the legislature for a
definite term of office and has broad powers not subject to the
direct control of the legislature. The United States invented this
form of government.
In a parliamentary government, the executive chief and
cabinet (the executive branch) are themselves members of the
legislative branch (parliament). The leader of the majority party
in parliament is chosen by the legislative members to be the
prime minister (also called chancellor or premier). Under this
system, the executive branch is subject to the direct control of
the legislative branch.
Variations of these relationships are
called mixed presidential/parliamentary
governments.
Some governments have similar forms
but act differently. India and the United
States are both called federal republics.
However, India’s president, the head of
state, is chosen by elected members of par-
liament and state legislative assemblies.
The prime minister holds the real power
and is accountable to parliament. The U.S.
president is elected by the people (through
an electoral college) and is not directly
responsible to the legislative branch. Both
Saudi Arabia and Japan have monarchies,
but the Saudi Arabian ruler has absolute
power and is ultimately responsible to no
one. Japan has an emperor and a constitu-
tion. The monarch is a ceremonial head of
state with no political power.
You can learn
more about the
U.S. government
by reading the
Citizenship in the
Community and
Citizenship in the
Nation merit
badge pamphlets.CITIZENSHIP
IN THE COMMUNITY
SKU 623016CITIZENSHIP
IN THE NATION
SKU 649784
FPO


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 27
Country Distribution of Power
Relationship Between
Legislative and Executive
Branches
Level of Citizen
Participation
Form of
Government
Unitary Federal Parliament Presidential Democracy Dictatorship
France X X X Republic
India X X X Federal
republic
Japan X X X Constitutional
monarchy
Myanmar
(Burma)
X X Junta
People’s
Republic of
China
X X X One-party
republic
Saudi Arabia X X Absolute
monarchy
United
States
X X X Federal
republic
Vatican City X X X Theocracy
Forms of Government


28 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Comparative Political Systems.
Other governments have a particular form on paper but
act differently. They may claim to be a democracy because
certain democratic processes such as elections are in place.
Yet, these elections are not always free and fair. The People’s
Republic of China calls itself a republic, but only members of
the Chinese Communist Party are allowed to run for office.
In fact, the Party is the government, controlling all media
and monitoring citizens’ use of the internet.
Many governments around the world are in a state of
transition. Certain nations formerly ruled by absolute monarchs
or dictators have made efforts to become democracies
or republics. Some have a caretaker, or temporary, government
while the nation is in the process of creating a constitution
and electing new leaders. Others are collapsing as rival
factions wage civil wars.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 29
.Comparative Political Systems
Your efforts (along with those of other Scouts and citizens
of the world) to understand the political and economic systems
of the world’s nations will lead to greater global tolerance
and well-being.
As you learn about different
political systems, you also
will learn how people value
their governments and
how governments value
their citizens.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 31
.National Interest
National Interest
A government classifies areas of interest in two ways: public
and national. Public (domestic) interests are internal concerns—
such as education, health care, and taxation—to be addressed
within the country’s borders according to public policy. National
(foreign) interests refer to those issues that affect relations
beyond a country’s borders. These goals—such as military
actions, expansion of international trade, and humanitarian
efforts—are shaped through foreign policy.
Every nation in the world acts according to its own
principal interests. The concept of national interest is based on
the idea that the government will protect its citizens, property,
and boundaries against infringement, or trespass, by any other
nation. The key areas of national interest are national security
and survival, economic welfare, and national values.
National security is considered an area of vital interest.
Defense of the homeland, preservation of territorial borders,
and the health and safety of the citizens are so critical that
other areas of national interest are subordinate to these
objectives. A nation’s level of concern about its own security
depends on how it regards other nations’ motives. South Korea
maintains a large, well-equipped military force because it
believes its neighbor, North Korea, might attack it.
A nation’s economic welfare is based on the health of its
economy, which varies according to the nation’s resources and
how they are produced, distributed, and consumed. The inter-
ests of one nation are affected by events and conditions in other
nations or regions. For example, Cuba’s centralized economy
has long been dependent on foreign aid from the Soviet bloc.
After the collapse of the Soviet Union in 1990, Cuba experi-
enced an economic crisis. The Cuban government redirected its
foreign policies to seek new trading partners and allow foreign
investments in Cuba.
An issue of vital
interest is so
important to a
nation’s well-
being that it
cannot be
compromised.
________
A bloc is a group
of nations that act
together for
military, economic,
or political
purposes.


32 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
National Interest.
National values are based on a nation’s traditional beliefs,
culture, religion, and historical experiences. Every nation has
an interest in protecting and promoting its way of life. America
spreads its national values—a blend of diverse immigrant
values and democratic principles—through foreign aid and
humanitarian assistance.
International Relations
The United States, like most other democratic countries, has
an open society. People, money, ideas, and products move
easily across borders with little interference. That encourages
international trade and tourism, cultural exchanges, and educa-
tional opportunities.
International terrorists, however, have exploited the
strengths of an open society—freedoms, mobility, and trust—to
further their causes. Physical borders are becoming meaningless
—just lines on a map. In fact, borders are disappearing as com-
puter hackers attack governments and multinational companies
in cyberspace, rogue nations threaten to launch long-range
nuclear missiles, and radicals wage biological warfare through
the mail.
Today, neither advantageous geographical position nor
great military strength can ensure national security. Events
and conditions within and across borders affect other countries
and regions, threatening the stability and favorable balance of
nations. These transnational problems cannot be resolved by
any one nation, but require international cooperation.
A rogue nation
is a specific
government that
acts unpredictably
in pursuit of its
own goals—
to the point of
endangering
citizens in
other countries.
Foreign aid is the transfer of
money, goods, or services from
one nation to another for the
benefit of both nations.
Humanitarian assistance
includes acts of help—providing
temporary shelter, food, medical
supplies—in response to natural
disasters, civil war, and the out-
break of a disease restricted to a
specific region, such as this food
distribution effort in Burundi.
ICRC/Thierry Gassmann


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 33
.National Interest
• Drug trafficking
• Famine
• Foreign investments
• Human rights violations
• Migration of civil war refugees
• Natural disasters
• Pandemics
• Population explosion
• Proliferation (spread) of
weapons of mass destruction
• Terrorism
• Use of outer space
Nations that recognize their dependent and interdependent
relationships with other nations form groups called alliances and
pledge to support one another in times of conflict. Some form
alliances around economic, environmental, or humanitarian
concerns. One nation may belong to many alliances.
As governments alter foreign policy in response to
international crises or opportunities, they often break away
from political friends or strike deals with former foes. Allies are
not necessarily friends for life; they are friends of convenience.
Foreign Policy
Foreign policy includes all the positions and actions a nation
takes in its relationships with the rest of the world. It exists to
protect and promote the national interest. The continuity of
foreign policies from year to year reassures a nation’s allies
and wins domestic support. Yet a nation must be creative in
response to threats or opportunities. For example, after the
September 11, 2001, bombing of the World Trade Center in New
York City, the U.S. government created the Department
of Homeland Security, a new executive cabinet position.
Before a nation can conduct foreign policy, the rest of the world must
formally recognize it. If one nation recognizes another, it acknowledges
the legal existence of that nation and government. Sometimes, because
of war or revolution, a government collapses or is taken over by one or
more factions. Only the government that the world recognizes has the
legitimate right to conduct foreign policy.
A pandemic is a
disease—such
as bubonic plague
or HIV/AIDS—
prevalent
throughout a large
region, country,
continent, or the
whole world.


34 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
National Interest.
Self-sufficiency, Independence, and Interdependence.
Nations establish foreign policy based on their beliefs about
whether they can survive on their own or need the help of
other nations. Governments and policymakers use one (or a
combination) of approaches.
• Isolationism: A nation turns inward, refusing to get involved
with the affairs of the rest of the world.
• Unilateralism: A nation makes one-sided decisions, relying
on its own resources and capabilities in pursuit of foreign
policy objectives.
• Bilateralism or multilateralism: A nation coordinates delib-
erate actions with two or more countries to achieve certain
objectives, such as disarmament (reduction of weapons).
National interest is never static. Foreign policy shifts in
response to changes on domestic and international fronts.
Citizens living under an authoritarian government have little
say about relations with other nations. But in a pluralistic
society, many raise their voices. Individuals who make no
effort to inform themselves about global issues risk letting
special interest groups speak for them.
Good world citizens pay attention to the political debate
about international challenges, try to understand the
pros and cons of a broad or narrow foreign policy, and
advise their elected representatives how to vote on
their behalf.
In the United
States, the
president’s formal
pronouncement
about foreign
policy issues
of crucial
importance is
often referred
to as a doctrine
(as in the
Monroe Doctrine).
_______
A pluralistic
government
embraces
cultural diversity
and encourages
general
participation in
decision making.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 35
Department of State
• Official liaison with foreign embassies in
Washington, D.C.
• The main source of foreign-affairs information
• Chiefly responsible for planning and
implementing U.S. foreign policy
• Responsible for all official relationships
with governments of other countries
• Negotiates treaties and agreements with
foreign governments
• Represents the U.S. before the UN and other
international organizations
• Led by the secretary of state, a cabinet
member approved by the Senate to advise
the president on foreign policy
• The secretary of state directs the USIA, the
Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the
Agency for International Development, and
the Peace Corps.
• Established by Congress in 1947
• Advises president on foreign policy
• Analyzes complex issues of national security
• Headed by president and the secretaries of
state and defense
• May invite heads of other agencies (such
as the CIA and Joint Chiefs of Staff) to
its meetings
• Scope of duties varies with each president
National Security Council
• Gives advice and consent on treaties and
ambassadorial appointments
• Has legislative control over the budgets of
foreign affairs agencies and activities
• Makes law in immigration, foreign trade, and
international monetary arrangements
• Provides for the common defense and
general welfare of the U.S. by regulating
international commerce and declaring war
• Committees, such as the House International
Relations, Senate Foreign Relations, and
Armed Services and Appropriations
committees, guide foreign affairs legislation
through Congress.
• Oversees the president’s conduct of foreign
policy by conducting hearings, investigations,
and overseas on-site inspections
• Some members of Congress serve as
delegates to the United Nations and
international conferences.
Congress
• The corps of professional employees of the
State Department
• Represents the U.S. in foreign countries and
to international organizations
• Generally referred to as diplomats
• Employees are chosen by competitive exam
and promoted on merit.
• Uses wide range of skills to implement
American foreign policy:
—international protocols
—negotiating skills
—specialized professional or
technical skills
The U.S. Foreign Service
• The central figure in making and
conducting foreign policy
• Commander-in-chief of the armed forces
• Assisted by the Department of State
• With the Senate’s advice and consent,
can negotiate treaties and appoint
ambassadors, consuls, and other public
ministers to represent the U.S. abroad
President
Who Makes U.S. Foreign Policy





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 37
.The World Order of Nations
The World Order
of Nations
You know there is a huge difference between needing some-
thing and wanting it. It’s the difference between poking in the
dirt for a carrot to eat and ordering a hot fudge sundae with a
cherry on top. It’s the difference between just enough (or not
enough) and plenty, between survival and prosperity. That’s
the kind of difference between most people living in Bangladesh
and those in the United States.
A nation’s economic world view has everything to do with
its position in the world order, or hierarchy of world economies.
These economies are classified according to specific factors:
standards of living, economic productivity and growth, and
use of modern information technology.
The term developed country is often used to describe a
country that has a mature economy and a technologically
advanced infrastructure. But this description is not based on
data, nor is it complete. The United Nations Human
Development Index (HDI) is based on data. The HDI
measures key dimensions of human development: a long and
The citizens of
highly developed
nations have
many more rights
and privileges
than do those of
less developed
countries.


38 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
The World Order of Nations.
healthy life, being knowledgeable, and having
a decent standard of living.
The health dimension is assessed by life
expectancy at birth, the knowledge/education
dimension is measured by mean of years of
schooling for adults aged 25 years and more
and expected years of schooling for children
of school entering age. Standard of living is
measured by gross national income (GNI)
per capita.
The HDI simplifies and captures only part
of what human development entails. It does
not reflect on inequalities, poverty, human
security, empowerment, etc.
The HDI ranges from 0.000 (lowest
development) to 1.000 (highest development).
Countries that score between 1.000 and 0.800
are classified as developed. Countries with HDI
score below that are classified as developing.
Find the ranking at hdr.undp.org/data-
center/country-insights#/ranks
Residents of rural China, one of
the world’s developing, or second
world, nations.
In third world countries, the poor health standards contribute to
the low standard of living.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 39
.The World Order of Nations
People all around the world have the same basic needs in
terms of food, shelter, safety, and health. Once these needs are
met, the lifestyles of people around the world start to look alike.
In the fourth world and in some third world countries, people
use bicycles and motorbikes to get around. There are few paved
roads. As income per person rises, the consumer demand for
automobiles rises. That necessitates the construction of modern
highways, which ultimately leads to the development of rail
transportation systems and an infrastructure to support the
growth of major urban areas.
At the point that consumer demand is more about
wanting than needing products, a nation has achieved a
level of prosperity. Movement up the ladder of development
depends on the government’s ability to put the right policies,
institutions, and infrastructure in place at the right time. If the
government keeps a tight control on currency, banking, and
communications, it creates a barrier to growth and its
economy will stagnate. However, if the government is open to
participation in the global economy, the nation can prosper.
In fourth world countries, famine and homelessness are just two
of the serious day-to-day concerns many people face.
Infrastructure
is the system
of public works
that support the
people living in an
area, such as a
town, region,
or country. It
includes public
transportation
systems, water
and sanitation,
electric power,
communications
networks,
and finance.


40 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
The World Order of Nations.
Economic Activities Around the World
A nation’s place in the world order relates to the kinds of
activities that are the foundation of its economy. These
economic activities are classified into three sectors.
Primary Sector. This first level of economic activities is based
on extracting raw materials from Earth’s surface. Primary sector
industries include agriculture, forestry, fishing, and mining. The
majority of people working in third world countries are involved
in these labor-intensive activities.
Secondary Sector. Activities in this sector involve industries
that transform raw materials into finished goods—manufactur-
ing and construction.
Tertiary Sector. Industries in this sector produce intangibles,
also known as services. These include consumer-oriented
services such as retail trade, banking and investment services,
health care, communications, transportation, and nonprofit
organizations. Most of the economic activities in first world
countries occur in the tertiary sector.
If you follow the lifecycle of a product, you will see that it
moves through the sectors in sequence. For example, workers
in the primary sector cut down trees. In the second sector, the
timber is turned into lumber at a mill, and then used to build
houses. In the tertiary sector, various services spin off from the
home construction industry: real estate practices, mortgage
Intangibles are
products that
cannot be seen
or touched.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 41
.The World Order of Nations
companies, insurance agencies, furniture and home improvement
stores, as well as landscape and carpet cleaning businesses.
A nation’s economy is like a product. Over time it moves
through the sequence of economic activities. Depending on its
foreign policy and other factors, the nation may develop from
a source of raw materials and manpower to a provider of ser-
vices, from a third world country into a first world nation.
Today most countries’ economies depend on a combination
of two or more sectors.
Geography, Natural Resources, and Climate
If you asked several real estate agents to name the top three
factors to consider when buying a house, they probably
would all say, “Location. Location. Location.” They mean
that place matters.
That’s true for countries, too. Where a country is located
makes a huge difference in whether it will prosper or struggle.
Where People Settle
As people gave up the nomadic lifestyle of hunting and gather-
ing, many settled down to farm along fertile strips of land in
coastal areas and on flood plains near rivers. The yields of their
crops depended on a favorable climate. Farmers in temperate
climates (moderate temperatures and rainfall) had a better
chance of producing abundant crops than farmers in other
climate regions. That is true today, too.
Latitude, elevation, ocean currents, bodies of water,
mountains, and winds all impact the climate of different
regions. Natural hazards and seasonal weather patterns affect
populations and economies worldwide. Earthquakes, volcanoes,
hurricanes, tornadoes, torrential rains, and droughts cause
deaths, environmental damage, food shortages, and even civil
unrest. As the real estate agents will tell you, location matters.
History can play a key role in how countries interact
with each other. For example, one country might
have a dominant religion that conflicts with another
country’s dominant religion. Such is the case between
Israel and Saudi Arabia. Other historic factors that
could influence the relationship between two
countries are their cultural beliefs and class system.


42 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
The World Order of Nations.
Natural Resources
What is above and what’s under the surface of a country make
a difference in how well the people there live. Nations depend
on energy and materials extracted from the environment. These
natural resources are the basic elements of economies.
If a country has abundant and available resources, then
it can use them to meet the population’s essential
needs and take the surplus to market for cash. Natural
resources are categorized as:
• Inexhaustible sources of energy—sun, tides,
water, wind. These are continuously generated.
Their production cannot be reduced or exhausted
by mismanagement.
• Renewable resources—crops, fisheries, forests,
soils. These resources are renewed, or regenerated,
by either environmental processes or biological
reproduction. Climate and terrain (the physical fea-
tures of the land) affect their abundance or scarcity.
Although these resources can be replaced, they
also can be depleted—used up—or destroyed
by mismanagement.
• Nonrenewable resources—fossil fuels (coal, petro-
leum, natural gas), industrial minerals (sand, lime-
stone, salt, sulfur, phosphate), land, metals (ores).
These are minerals and cannot be replenished.
It is possible to recycle metal resources, such as
iron and copper. However, coal, oil, and natural gas—
which supply 80 percent of the world’s energy—are
completely consumed when used. Because of the
importance of these resources, nations form strategic
alliances to use and protect them.
The quality and quantity of natural resources are unevenly
distributed around the world. Those countries with abundant
resources and the means to use them, like the United States and
Canada, have thrived. Most poor countries have scarce natural
resources and lack the means to use what they do have.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 43
.The World Order of Nations
Place to Place
If a country intends to trade or sell its surplus resources, it must
be able to get them to market. Many developing nations are
located in the tropical regions of the world. Foods such as rice,
fruits, and vegetables can be grown there, but the dense forest
growth and heavy rainfall make it hard to build and maintain
roads needed to move the products to market. So people in
these countries rely on water transport and live near the banks
of navigable rivers.
Those nations that are most successful trading with
other countries have long coastlines with deepwater ports
and protected harbors. Yet Russia—despite its long coastline—
has no ice-free ports in winter, so it has problems with
shipping freight.
Some of the poorest countries in the world are landlocked.
(Switzerland and Austria, however, have managed to become
first world nations despite being landlocked.) Africa has
15 landlocked nations. Without direct access to oceans, these
countries lack fishing and shipping opportunities and are at a
serious disadvantage compared to coastline countries. They
depend on being allowed to ship their products on roads or
rivers that cross national borders. In Africa, civil wars and
famines occur often and rebels illegally seize shipments.
In order for these third world nations to develop economically,
they must find ways to cooperate.
Take advantage of any opportunity you have to speak with
Scouts from faraway places. This is the most fascinating way
to learn more about the world.


44 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
The World Order of Nations.
Populations and Problems
Population growth is not a local problem unique to a particular
country, but a global issue that has to be tackled by all nations.
It cannot be addressed on its own, but must be considered in
terms of global poverty,
health and education, eco-
nomic development, and
environmental
damage. That requires
coordinated efforts in the
global community.
Almost three-quarters
of the world’s population
lives in third world
nations. More than 80 per-
cent of the population
increase is taking place in
less-developed countries.
Population growth
(from births and migration
of refugees) puts pressure
on land resources, resulting in food shortage crises.
There is a limit to Earth’s carrying capacity, or ability
to support the world’s population. Yet many people think that
because resources like air and water are owned in common,
they do not have to make special efforts to protect and conserve
those resources. More than 200 of the world’s river basins are
shared by two or more countries. So one country’s toxic waste
Yemen, on the south coast of the Arabian Peninsula,
has large deposits of natural gas, which it wants to sell
worldwide. However, the costs of getting the gas to
market are high because the gas is locked in an inland
desert, with two mountain ranges separating it from
the Red Sea coast.
On the other hand, Yemen’s competitor—tiny Qatar
on the Persian Gulf—has 62 times as much natural gas
beneath the sea. The gas can be pumped out, chilled
into liquefied natural gas, and then poured into the
hulls of refrigerated supertankers.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 45
.The World Order of Nations
dumping may contaminate the water used by other countries
downstream. Air pollution caused by chemical spills and nuclear
disasters, such as those in Bhopal, India, and Chernobyl,
Ukraine, affected human lives, trade, agriculture, and industry
throughout the world.
The main way to achieve sustainable development is
through resource management. This approach involves deci-
sions about which natural resources should—and should not—
be developed, how much and in what way to develop them,
and for whom. These decisions are influenced by economic,
political, and cultural concerns.
The growth of the world’s population and the health of
the world’s environment affect us all. No nation can afford to
ignore problems beyond its borders. The depletion or tight con-
trol of natural resources calls for cooperative efforts to manage
these resources responsibly and find new sources of energy.
Global pollution requires collective environmental protection
measures. Ask yourself how you can contribute to the welfare
of the planet and its people. The world will feel like a much
smaller place.
Sustainable development is economic growth that bal-
ances the needs of humanity and the benefits of indus-
trialization with environmental care. Managing natural
resources and discouraging the waste of nonrenewable
resources helps ensure the health of the planet for
future generations.
Striking an Ecological Balance
Pharmaceutical companies have realized that rain for-
ests may hold the cure for certain diseases. In order to
gain access to the microbes, insects, and plants, some
companies are agreeing in trade negotiations to finance
the efforts of conservation groups that protect the bio-
diversity of the tropical ecosystems.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 47
.International Trade and Commerce
International Trade
and Commerce
Regardless of how a nation might choose to isolate itself from
world events, it is not entirely self-sufficient. No nation’s
economy can produce all the goods and services that its citizens
demand, so it must exchange resources and products with other
countries. This exchange among nations is called by various
terms: international trade, global trade, foreign trade, and
international commerce.
Economic Systems and Ideologies
Every nation must make decisions about what goods to produce,
in what quantity, how to make the products, what to charge,
and where to distribute them. Production may be for subsis-
tence or for exchange. It may be organized for welfare or for
profits. Different economic systems address these issues in
different ways—according to government’s involvement.
The concept of trade refers to the business of buying
and selling products or bartering (exchanging one item
for another). People trade face-to-face at garage sales,
roadside vegetable stands, in tourist spots, and many
other places. Commerce is organized trade on a large
scale and usually involves transporting products from
place to place.
All nations can benefit from trading with one
another, but many factors affect how the gains will be
distributed in the international marketplace. A country’s
openness to international trade depends on its political
and economic systems.


48 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
International Trade and Commerce.
Capitalism
Capitalism is a market-based economic system, which means
that the decisions mentioned above are made in the market-
place through the law of supply and demand. This system,
also called a free enterprise, private enterprise, or free-
market economy, has the following characteristics:
• Private or corporate ownership
• Investments determined by private decision instead of by
state control
• Individual initiative
• Profit
• Competition
In a free enterprise system, the entrepreneur drives the
economy. Any individual has the right to start and run his or
her own business, as well as the right to close it. Because the
entrepreneur is the one who organizes, manages, invests, and
takes the financial risks of the business, that person also is
entitled to benefit from any profits.
Competition is a key feature of the free enterprise system.
When a number of companies offer the same product or
service, they have to compete for customers. The consumer
wants to buy the product with the best quality and lowest price.
If companies want more sales, they have to keep quality high
and prices low. In order to do both, companies have to find the
most efficient way to produce the products or services so that
they can still realize profits.
The law of supply and demand states that the price of
any product (or service) adjusts to bring the supply and
demand for that product into balance. When the supply
of a particular good or service is plentiful, the seller
tends to drop the price in order to compete. When the
supply becomes scarcer and demand is high (many
buyers want the product or service), the seller tends to
raise the price. If demand drops (fewer buyers want the
product), the seller lowers the price.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 49
.International Trade and Commerce
Capitalism lets consumers, entrepreneurs,
and workers make free choices. Buyers choose
what products they want to buy and which
services they want to use. Entrepreneurs
choose what type of business they wish to
own, and workers choose to stay, switch,
or quit jobs.
The basis of the U.S. economy is the
free market, but the government does regulate
certain economic activities in order to protect
the public. Pure food and drug laws, antipol-
lution standards, and subsidies (government
payments) to farmers to grow particular
crops are examples of such regulations. The
government also promotes private enterprise
by building an infrastructure to support
businesses, granting money for scientific
research, and developing foreign markets.
This economic system, in which the private
sector (individuals and companies) produces
goods and services and the public sector (government) regulates
and promotes business, is called a mixed economy.
In the United States, the government actually owns and
operates some of the services that could be provided by the
private sector. For example, Amtrak (the passenger train
service) and Medicare (the federal health care insurance
program), are run by the government.
The U.S. and Foreign
Commercial Service
The U.S. and Foreign Commercial Service, in the
Department of Commerce, focuses on promoting the
export of goods and services from the United States,
particularly by small- and medium-sized businesses,
and on the protection of U.S. business interests abroad.
The Commercial Service assists American businesses by
negotiating favorable trading terms and developing new
markets abroad. These businesses and multinational
corporations spread capitalism throughout the world.


50 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
International Trade and Commerce.
Socialism
Socialism is an economic and political system based on the idea
that all citizens should be economically and politically equal.
Unlike the United States, where citizens are all equal under the
law but unequal in terms of personal wealth, socialist nations
try to distribute wealth equally and fairly among all citizens.
They accomplish this through collective (public) ownership of
the principal means of producing and distributing goods and
services and centralized planning.
Under strict socialism, the government owns and operates
all businesses and controls all aspects of social welfare and
planning. In many socialist countries, the government controls
the large industries that affect all citizens, such as transporta-
tion, utilities, and communications.
In other socialist societies, the govern-
ment may allow individuals to own
certain businesses, yet it maintains
tight control.
Socialism attempts to guarantee
the public welfare by providing social
services for all citizens at little or no
cost to the users. These services can
include employment, housing, and
health care. Countries that provide
these extensive services are often
called welfare states. However, these services have to be
funded through taxes, which may amount to as much as 50
or 60 percent of a person’s total income.
Government bureaucrats make all the decisions about how
a socialist economy will develop over time. They determine
production goals and direct investments into specific industries.
This type of economy—in which the government controls the
factors of production and distribution—is called a centrally
planned or command economy.
Many countries—such as Sweden and Great Britain—are
democratic socialist nations. They combine a free market
economy with socialism. These, like most modern economies,
are mixed economies.
The systems of capitalism and socialism have pros and
cons. Capitalism encourages the individual to assume risks,
take advantage of new technologies, and decide how to use
personal income. However, many people still lack the means
Nationalization is the government’s
acquisition of—or assumption of
control over—privately owned
businesses. As economies based
on socialism or communism try to
make the transition to a free-market
economy, they go through privati-
zation, or the return of nationalized
businesses to private ownership.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 51
.International Trade and Commerce
to access services like good health care. Under socialism,
most citizens have their basic needs met and also have some
influence where they work. Yet, with the high taxes on their
earnings, they have little discretionary income and can
make few decisions about how to spend their money. Critics
of socialism argue that with so many public services provided,
the individual has little incentive to work hard.
Communism
In the mid-1800s, Karl Marx developed a social, political, and
economic theory in reaction to capitalism. He believed that
throughout history social classes have struggled for control
of labor and production. He thought that business owners
oppressed the workers and predicted that the laborers (masses)
would revolt and overthrow the capitalists. After a transitional
phase under authoritarian control, a free classless society would
emerge and the “people in common” would own all the proper-
ty. Marx and Friedrich Engels defined the concepts of this mul-
tifaceted theory in The Communist Manifesto.
Karl Marx is called the father of modern communism.
Many of his followers believed that socialism (collective owner-
ship), an early stage of communism, could be achieved peace-
fully through democratic processes, but Marx called for a
“violent and bloody revolution,” if necessary. Those who agreed
with Marx became known as communists.
In 1917, a communist revolution in Russia led to the creation
of the Soviet Union and then to the spread of communism in
Eastern Europe and China after World War II.
In the late 1980s, communism collapsed in
Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union as
people rallied for greater freedom of thought
and economic opportunity.
Today, Cuba and North Korea are two
of the few remaining communist nations.
Although the Communist Party is the only
political party in Vietnam and the People’s
Republic of China, these centrally planned
economies are introducing elements of the
free market.
Developing countries with no experience
in building large industries and infrastructure
tend to rely on centrally planned economies.
Discretionary
income is the
money available
after basic needs
have been met.
________
The word
communism
comes from the
Latin communis,
which means
“common,
belonging to all.”


52 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
International Trade and Commerce.
However, governments focused on investing in a few industries
or producing specific goods may neglect the production of food
or certain consumer goods. At that point, the citizens may
become resentful and unruly. Political instability invites authori-
tarian control.
In order to attract foreign investment, countries must
create a predictable environment that reassures entrepreneurs
and foreign governments. A good investment climate offers
access to markets, stable government, and transparency.
Developing nations under authoritarian control are not transpar-
ent, so investors are reluctant to sink capital into projects that
could be nationalized.
Scarcity and Surplus
No matter what type of economic system a nation has, it
depends on certain resources to produce goods and services.
Here are the basic resources, called factors of production:
• Natural resources (renewable and nonrenewable resources
produced by nature)
• Human capital (knowledge and skills that workers acquire
through education, training, and experience)
• Physical capital (stock of equipment and structures used to
produce goods and services, including money)
• Technical knowledge (society’s understanding of the best way
to produce goods and services)
Different countries have different amounts of these
resources, so they use them differently. Singapore has few
natural resources but much human capital, so it specializes in
manufacturing goods (such as computer and office equipment)
that require a large labor force.
What to Import or Export?
To determine which goods and services to specialize in, most
nations concentrate on producing what they can most easily
and cheaply transport to other markets. If the United States
produces more wheat than it can use (a surplus) and Japan
produces more electronic components than it can use, then
the United States can export its surplus wheat to Japan and
import Japan’s surplus components. Through specialization
and trade, the two countries can get more of both products.
Transparency is
the quality of
being able to see
through public
and foreign
policies and
governmental
actions to detect
corruption.
A transparent
society is an open
society, which
allows access to
information.
________
Exports are
goods produced
domestically
and sold to
foreign markets.
Imports are goods
produced abroad
and sold
domestically.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 53
.International Trade and Commerce
One factor a nation considers when deciding whether to
export or import a product in the free market is the domestic
price compared to the world price for the same product.
For example, if the domestic price for broccoli is $1.25 per
pound and the world price is $1.79, then the nation could gain
54 cents per pound by exporting broccoli. If, on the other hand,
the domestic price for broccoli is $1.79 per pound and the
world price is $1.25, then the nation would import broccoli.
When a country allows free trade and exports a product,
the domestic producers of that product are better off because
they receive the higher world price. However, the consumers
of the good are worse off because they now have to pay the
higher world price. When a country imports a good, domestic
consumers of that good are better off because they now pay
the lower world price, but domestic producers of the good
are worse off because they have to drop the domestic price of
their good to compete with the world price. Even though trade
doesn’t make everyone better off at the same time, it does raise
a nation’s standard of living.
Free Trade, Barriers, and Economic Alliances
At times, however, when domestic producers are feeling the
negative effects of importing goods, they will often pressure the
government to protect them. If the domestic broccoli producers
described earlier wanted to continue growing broccoli instead of
switching to another crop, they might ask the government to
levy a tariff on broccoli imports. The tax raises the price of
imported broccoli above the world price by the amount of the
tariff. Now domestic producers can sell broccoli at a price equal
to the world price plus the tariff and compete with foreign pro-
ducers. This tariff reduces the quantity of imports and generates
revenue (income from the tax) for the government.
Some U.S. industries complain that America is flooded with
low-cost goods from foreign markets. Domestic automobile and
clothing manufacturers, for example, say the cost of labor is so
cheap in third world countries that they cannot compete. These
Many industries try to cut costs by outsourcing, or subcontracting jobs
to foreign companies. Workers in the United States and other first world
nations worry about losing their jobs to workers in foreign countries
where labor costs are cheaper.
The domestic
price of a product
or service not
traded in the
international
market is the price
consumers pay at
home. The world
price is the price
nations are paying
in the world
market for that
same product.
________
When a
government levies
a tariff, it imposes
a tax (or duty) on
goods produced
abroad and sold
domestically.


54 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Pros and Cons of Free Trade
Workers can find jobs in the
industries where we have a
comparative advantage.
Besides, trade with other
countries gives them money
to buy other goods from
the United States.
Jobs
FREE TRADE ADVOCATE PROTECTIONIST
National
Security
Infant
Industry
Unfair
Competition
Bargaining
Chip
Other
Benefits to
Free Trade
Some industries would claim
they are vital to national
security in order to take
advantage of the consumer.
If entrepreneurs think the
industry will be profitable
in the long run, they should
take the risk and the losses
in the short run.
The domestic consumer of
subsidized imports would
benefit.
The threat of restricting
trade could backfire.
Trade offers consumers more
variety of goods and lowers
the cost of producing a good
through economies of scale.
Free trade increases competi-
tion because the forces of
supply and demand determine
the fair price for a good.
Trade with other countries
eliminates domestic jobs.
Industries that are vital
to national security should
be protected.
New industries need
protection to get started.
Some nations subsidize
certain industries through
big tax breaks or have lax
environmental standards.
The threat of imposing a
tariff or quota could result
in the lifting of other
trade restrictions.
Free trade encourages
countries to exploit
one another.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 55
.International Trade and Commerce
industries lobby (try to influence) the government to
protect their businesses by imposing quotas, which are limits
on the amount of specific items that can be imported.
Tariffs and quotas are called trade barriers because they
block free trade. Many people disagree about whether the
economy benefits from efforts to protect industries and jobs
by restricting trade.
International Trade Agreements and
Economic Alliances
International trade agreements are treaties to develop and
promote trade among nations. Nations often agree to buy
specific products from each other. These treaties provide the
participating countries with special treatment such as easing
or eliminating trade barriers.
One of the most important international trade agreements
is the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, which is the
only multilateral treaty that establishes agreed-upon rules for
world trade. According to a provision called the most favored
nation clause, two parties that have signed a GATT agreement
will offer each other the same advantages that they have offered
to (or plan to offer) third parties. These advantages
usually apply to tariffs. Today the World Trade Organization
oversees compliance with those rules. More than 144 nations
belong to the WTO. Its purpose is to liberalize international
trade by reducing tariffs and subsidies and abolishing quotas
on certain products.
Often nations try to strengthen their own economies
by forming a regional alliance with other economies.
They integrate their markets by:
• Reducing barriers to free trade among certain countries
• Creating common trade barriers to outside nations
• Coordinating policies about taxes and specific
business activities
These regional trade blocs take the forms of free trade
areas and economic unions.
The North American Free Trade Act is a trade agreement
among Mexico, Canada, and the United States. NAFTA removed
trade barriers in order to promote the free movement of goods
and services across borders. In 2004, Canada and Mexico were
the United States’ top two trading partners for combined
exports and imports.
Economies of
scale means
that over time the
average cost of
producing a good
decreases as the
quantity of the
good produced
increases.


56 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
International Trade and Commerce.
The United States
extends most
favored nation
status to almost
every one of its
trading partners.
Because the
status is not the
exception but the
norm, the term
was changed to
normal trade
relations status.
The European Union is a political and economic union of
27 member nations that share a common currency called the
euro. The EU gets funding from contributions made by member
countries, as well as from import duties on non-EU products
and other taxes. In return, EU countries receive services such as
rural and urban development, environmental protection, border
protection, and human rights protection for their citizens. The
EU also assists countries with building economic stability and
growth.
A group called the European Commission proposes laws,
enforces legislation, and implements policies adopted by the
European Parliament (the EU’s law-making body) and the
Council of the EU (the “voice” of EU member governments).
The EU’s priorities are set by the Council of the EU (or
European Council), although this body does not have the power
to pass laws. It is led by a president and comprises national
heads of state or government, as well as the president of the
European Commission.
Protectionists argue that nations have to give up some
measure of sovereignty to participate in free trade areas and
economic unions like the European Union.
Balance of Payments and Foreign Exchange
Nations are like big families with budgets. They shop, work,
buy, and sell. At the end of the day, the money they spend
should equal the money they earn. The balance of trade is the
difference—over a period of time—between the value of a
country’s imports and exports. If the value of what a country
exports is greater than what it imports, the country has a trade
surplus. If the value of its imports is greater than the value of
its exports, the country has a trade deficit.
A nation must add several other items to its trade
balance to know if it really has a balanced budget: government
purchases abroad, investments across international borders,
and changes in the value of government holdings of gold and
foreign currencies.
Once a nation calculates all of its international transactions
over a period of time—including foreign aid and income from
tourists—it determines its balance of payments. How a nation
balances its accounts depends on foreign policies, economic
opportunities or risks, and the value of its currency.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 57
.International Trade and Commerce
If you traded your friend five pairs of new shoes for five
new cellphones, would you call it even? Probably not. You
might calculate the value of the items traded and figure out
how much money your friend still owed you. Nations handle
their balance of payments in a similar way. However, because
countries use different currency systems, they need ways to
adjust how they pay their debts to each other.
The foreign exchange rate is the price of one currency
in terms of another. Exchange rates are important because
they affect the relative price of domestic and foreign goods.
If a country’s currency appreciates, or rises in value, compared
to other currencies, then the country’s goods abroad (exports)
become more expensive and foreign goods in that country
(imports) become cheaper. When a country’s currency
depreciates, or loses value, compared to other currencies,
then its exports become cheaper and imports become
more expensive.
Tourists traveling abroad hope their currency is strong
compared with the currency in the foreign country because
meals, hotels, and souvenirs will not cost as much. For
example, if an American went to the Philippines, this tourist
would find that one U.S. dollar equals almost 53 Philippines
pesos. So a hotel room in Manila that costs 1,200 Philippines
pesos per night would cost about 23 U.S. dollars.
Consider that an American tourist in Europe might be
surprised to find that the U.S. dollar is weak compared to the
euro. A hotel in Brussels that costs 63 euros per night might
cost about 71 U.S. dollars.
The International Monetary Fund
and the World Bank
The International Monetary Fund
is an international organization
that encourages international trade
and foreign exchange rate stability,
and offers balance-of-payments
assistance to debtor nations. The IMF
works with the World Bank to address
the problems of the most heavily
indebted developing countries.


58 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
International Trade and Commerce.
The exchange rate depends
on the supply and demand for
the currency in the foreign
exchange market, so the rate
changes every day. The exchange
rate on a particular day is called
the spot rate. The rate of
exchange between two currencies
for a particular transaction is
called the cross rate.
Foreign currencies can be bought or sold now and
delivered in the future. These transactions are done by
purchasing a buy or sell contract for a specific currency
in the foreign exchange market. The exchange rate used is
called the forward rate.
You can find foreign exchange rates in the business section
of many city newspapers. Financial publications such as the
Wall Street Journal publish daily listings of the spot rates and
forward rates of major world currencies.
The foreign exchange market is not a place, but an
organized group of several hundred dealers (mostly
central banks like the Federal Reserve Bank in the
United States) that conduct electronic transactions
to buy and sell bank deposits denominated in
different currencies.
Each nation’s currency is unique
and not interchangeable.
U.S. dollars are not the
same as Indian rupees or
Japanese yen. Nor are
currencies called by the
same name. The pesos of
Argentina are different
from the pesos used in
Mexico. The dinars of
Jordan, Kuwait, and Bahrain
are not interchangeable, either.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 59
.International Trade and Commerce
Countries will not allow their exchange rates to drop too
low. They maintain a special stock of foreign currencies known
as international reserves. When a currency decreases too
much, a nation will intervene in the foreign exchange market
and buy some of its own currency with its international
reserves in order to stabilize the exchange rate.
Since the United States is the world’s leading trading
nation, most countries maintain their international reserves in
U.S. dollars. Many nations also accept U.S. dollars as payment.
In this way, the dollar often functions as an international mone-
tary unit. So the foreign exchange rate of the dollar is important
not only to the United States, but also to those countries that
fund their international reserves with dollars.
The global economy and international trade link all
nations. What happens in one country has a ripple effect
throughout the world. Political problems or a natural disaster
in one country could delay shipments of raw materials to other
countries—causing
production slowdowns,
which lead to layoffs or
firing of employees. Now
these countries are
exporting less (creating
a trade deficit), and
unemployed workers
are spending less in their
own economies, causing
the demand for domestic
products to drop. The
ripple effect continues.
It is important to
understand the basic con-
cepts about the global
economy and international trade because it leads to questions
about the people behind the products. Why is labor so cheap in
third world countries? How can millions of people each live on
less than $2 a day? Are children working in adult jobs?
As your knowledge increases, so does your compassion for
people around the world and your appreciation of your own
way of life.
A floating market in the developing country of Thailand


United Nations headquarters, New York City


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 61
.United Nations System
United Nations System
The United Nations is a multinational organization established
after World War II to ensure that nations would work together
to avoid war in the future. It is neither a government nor a
nation, so it has no sovereign power of its own. Although it
cannot determine the legitimacy of a nation, it can accept
credentials for membership.
As of October 2013, U.N. membership included 193
independent nations. Each member nation is a member of
the General Assembly and has one vote. Dependencies are
represented indirectly by their ruling countries. They, like areas
of special sovereignty, are invited to be observers at sessions
of the General Assembly and to maintain permanent offices at
U.N. headquarters in New York City.
Goals of the United Nations
The United States was the first nation in 1945 to ratify the
U.N. charter, which is—in effect—the written constitution
of the United Nations. According to the charter, the goals of
the United Nations are to maintain international peace and
the collective security and promote cooperation in solving
international political, economic, social, cultural, and humani-
tarian problems.
A dependency is a subject territory that is not an essential part of the
ruling country. For example, the Falkland Islands off the coast of Argentina
is one of the United Kingdom’s dependent territories. An area of special
sovereignty is a geographical/political area whose status of sovereignty
is unresolved. The West Bank and Gaza Strip in the Middle East, for
example, are areas of special sovereignty—pending final status negotia-
tions with Israel.


62 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
United Nations System.
In order to achieve its goals, the United Nations developed
key objectives for the 21st century:
• Promoting the creation of independent and democratic societies
• Protecting human rights
• Saving children from starvation and disease
• Providing relief assistance to refugees and disaster victims
• Countering global crime, drugs, and disease
• Assisting countries devastated by war and the long-term
threat of land mines
Structure of the United Nations
The U.N. charter organizes the United Nations into six principal
organs: General Assembly, Security Council, Economic and
Social Council, Trusteeship Council, International Court of
Justice, and Secretariat.
Except for the International Court of Justice (also known as
the World Court), which is located in The Hague in the
Netherlands, the other organs operate out of U.N. headquarters.
These main bodies work with and through subsidiary U.N.
organizations and specialized agencies.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 63
The United Nations System
The United Nations is constantly changing; this chart may not be all-inclusive.
• Supervises territories that do not
govern themselves
• Secretary-general elected by
General Assembly
• Chief administrative office of the UN
• Fifteen council members—
ten two-year members and
five permanent members
• Main UN peacekeeping organization
• Can order cease-fires, negotiate,
impose sanctions, intervene with force
• Permanent members can
veto decisions
• Nominates secretary-general
• Votes for International Court judges
• Maintains UN forces
Subsidiary UN Organizations
UNRWA: Relief and Works Agency for
Palestine Refugees in the Near East
UNCTAD: Conference on Trade and
Development
UNICEF: Children’s Fund
UNHCR: Office of High Commissioner
for Refugees
WFP: World Food Program
UNITAR: Institute for Training and
Research
UNDP: Development Program
UNEP: Environment Program
UNU: United Nations University
UN-HABITAT: Center for Human Settlements
UNFPA: Fund for Population Activities
World Food Program
ITC: International Trade Center
UNCDF: Capital Development Fund
UNV: United Nations Volunteers
UNODC: Office on Drugs and Crime
UN-Women: Entity for Gender Equality
and the Empowerment of Women
UNICRI: Interregional Crime and Justice
Research Institute
UNIDIR: Institute for Disarmament
Research
UNRISD: Research Institute for Social
Development
UNSSC: System Staff College
UNAIDS: Joint Program on HIV/AIDS
UNISDR: International Strategy for
Disaster Reduction
UNOPS: Office for Project Services
• Runs administra-
tive functions of
the UN
Specialized Agencies
ILO: International Labor Organization
FAO: Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations
UNESCO: United Nations Educational,
Scientific, and Cultural Organization
WHO: World Health Organization
IMF: International Monetary Fund
IDA: International Development
Association
IBRD: International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development
IFC: International Finance Corporation
ICAO: International Civil Aviation
Organization
UPU: Universal Postal Union
ITU: International Telecommunication
Union
WMO: World Meteorological
Organization
IMO: International Maritime Organization
WIPO: World Intellectual Property
Organization
IFAD: International Fund for Agricultural
Development
UNIDO: United Nations Industrial
Development Organization
MIGA: Multilateral Investment Guarantee
Agency
ICSID: International Center for
Settlement of Investment Disputes
UNWTO: World Tourism Organization
• All UN member nations belong
• Debates any issue
• Studies international political, social,
and economic issues and makes
recommendations
• Passes resolutions with votes of
two-thirds majority
• Elects secretary-general and
International Court judges
• Helps supervise and select members
of other UN bodies
• Based at
The Hague,
Netherlands
• Fifteen elected
judges
• Serves all mem-
ber nations
• Rules on interna-
tional disputes
Trusteeship
Council
General Assembly
International Court
of Justice Secretariat
Economic and Social
Council
Security Council
IAEA: International Atomic Energy Agency
CTBTO PrepCom: Preparatory
Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization
OPCW: Organization for the Prohibition
of Chemical Weapons
GATT: General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade
WTO: World Trade Organization
• Members are elected by
General Assembly
• Studies social and
economic issues
• Supervises the many specialized
agencies and commissions
• Works through various commis-
sions and groups of experts


64 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
United Nations System.
Specialized agencies of the United Nations, such as the
International Monetary Fund, are separate autonomous organi-
zations, related to the United Nations by special agreements.
Call for Reform
Most people think of the United Nations’ efforts in terms of
peacekeeping and military conflicts. Historically, however, its
most valuable contributions are in the areas of international
law and the development of nations.
Citizens of many nations believe that the United Nations
is out of step with world changes. The balance of power has
shifted since 1945. Countries are no longer under colonial
control, and all trust territories are now self-governing or have
gained their independence.
Some nations are demanding an increase in the number
of permanent members in the Security Council. Others, such as
the United States, question how much sovereignty they have to
give up in order to cooperate with the United Nations.
Third world countries form the majority of members of the
U.N. General Assembly, where they have objected to the widen-
ing gap between rich and poor nations. Many of these nations
think the United Nations is too financially dependent on the
United States and other first world countries. If the wealthy
nations refuse to pay their dues, they can severely handicap
the United Nations’ ability to fulfill its purpose.
The five
permanent
members of the
Security Council
are China,
France, Russian
Federation,
United Kingdom,
and United
States of America.
A negative vote
from any one of
the permanent
members has the
power of a veto.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 65
.United Nations System
The United Nations General Assembly created
UNICEF (United Nations International Children’s
Emergency Fund) in 1946 to help “save and pro-
tect the world’s most vulnerable children”—at the
time, for those who had been devastated by WWII.
Today, UNICEF is a member of the United Nations
Development Group, and it focuses on assistance
to children and mothers in more than 190 devel-
oping countries and territories around the world.
Governments and private donations fund
UNICEF in its efforts to provide clean water,
nutrition, immunization, and treatment of
diseases like malaria and HIV/AIDS. UNICEF
provides resources for education, children with
disabilities, and emergency relief such as food crisis, countries in conflict,
and in places devastated by earthquakes, hurricanes, and other acts of
nature. The organization also is an advocate of fighting child trafficking,
prostitution, and labor, and violence against children.
Unless the majority of citizens around the world see the
United Nations as representing their interests—and not just
the interests of the permanent members of the Security Council
and their allies—then they will not trust the United Nations.
If that happens, the United Nations will not be able to
function anywhere.
As you learn about other nations, a map of the world will help
you put things into perspective. The map will most likely be
a political or a physical map and may include features such as
territorial boundaries.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 67
.Global Issues, Watchdogs, and Advocates
Global Issues, Watchdogs,
and Advocates
Global issues are boiling in pots around the world. Many of us
don’t lift the lids because we are not hungry, but the problems
still boil.
Because it is easy to ignore issues that don’t seem to affect
us directly—or are too complicated to be solved by one per-
son—we tend to leave the world’s problems to the politicians.
However, global issues such as environmental damage, contami-
nated food products, and infectious diseases affect us all.
Activists such as watchdogs and advocates keep these
problems in front of world citizens, policymakers, and intergov-
ernmental agencies. United Nations organizations often appoint
celebrities as goodwill ambassadors to bring attention to
global issues.
Human Rights Issues
Although today human rights have a higher place on foreign
policy agendas, nations disagree about which kind of rights are
most important. In first world countries, particularly in the
West, the critical human rights are individual freedoms. In third
world countries, where making ends meet is a common problem,
economic and social rights are more important than political
and civil rights.
Children have the rights to survival, good health, develop-
ment, and protection, yet millions suffer from poverty, malnutri-
tion, preventable diseases, and the trauma of war. Many are
recruited to serve as soldiers or forced to work in sweatshops.
Wars and pandemics have orphaned millions of children and
forced survivors into refugee camps or to fend for themselves.
A watchdog is
a person who
tries to guard
the integrity of
an organization
or cause by
watching out for
illegal or unethical
conduct. An
advocate supports
a person or issue
and pleads
the case in
courts of law or
public opinion.


68 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Global Issues, Watchdogs, and Advocates.
In parts of the world, women are still regarded as property.
They are not allowed to finish school and are married off as
girls. Their lack of education has a direct impact on the popula-
tion explosion and the poor health of families.
Genocide—the extermination of a racial, ethnic, religious,
or political group—still occurs. In 1994, extremists controlling
the government of the African nation Rwanda systematically
killed a half-million people.
How nations deal with the reports and facts of genocide
and other human rights abuses depends on national interest
and foreign policies. Tragically for the victims, nations are
reluctant to intervene if the human rights issues don’t
directly threaten the higher issues of national security and
economic interests.
International Human
Rights and Humanitarian
Organizations
Nongovernmental organizations,
or NGOs, act as the global con-
science, constantly reminding the
world’s nations of their human and
moral responsibilities. These private
groups, officially or unofficially
linked to the United Nations,
prod the United Nations to action
as well as extend its influence.
NGOs use the internet to share
information with people all over
the world, “naming and shaming”
corrupt individuals, governments,
and groups that commit human
rights abuses. One of the best-
known international NGOs is
Amnesty International.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 69
.Global Issues, Watchdogs, and Advocates
Amnesty International
Amnesty International is a worldwide movement dedicated
to protecting human rights as set out in the Universal
Declaration of Human Rights. This organization works to
gain the release of people who have been imprisoned for their
political or religious beliefs, racial or ethnic origin, or sex—
provided they have not used or encouraged violence. Its
members campaign to abolish the death penalty, torture,
and degrading punishment. They advocate prompt and fair
trials for all political prisoners, and try to ensure that abusers
are brought to justice in accordance with international law.
Amnesty International cooperates with other international
agencies and organizations, such as the United Nations, to
further shared goals. Each year it publishes global reports on
the state of human rights in most nations of the world, includ-
ing the United States. Despite winning the Nobel Peace Prize
in 1977, Amnesty International is considered by many to be a
controversial organization.
Cooperative for American Relief Everywhere (CARE)
Founded in 1945 to help World War II survivors, CARE has
evolved into an international relief agency dedicated to ending
poverty. In more than 60 countries around the world, CARE
provides food, disaster aid, health care training, self-help devel-
opment programs, and economic opportunities. As an indepen-
dent organization, CARE partners with other humanitarian
groups and builds relationships with governments to influence
policy decisions about overcoming poverty.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, adopted
by the General Assembly of the United Nations in 1948,
states that the “recognition of the inherent dignity and
of the equal and unalienable rights of all members of
the human family is the foundation of freedom, justice
and peace in the world. . . .” The declaration established
the standard for international behavior concerning
human rights.


70 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Global Issues, Watchdogs, and Advocates.
International Red Cross
The International Red Cross and Red Crescent Movement is
the umbrella organization for the individual national Red Cross
and Red Crescent Societies, the international federation of those
societies, and the International Committee of the Red Cross.
Established in 1863, the International Committee of the
Red Cross is a neutral and independent organization whose
mission is to provide protection and assistance to victims of
armed conflict. The ICRC directs and coordinates international
relief activities in accordance with the Geneva Conventions.
Its efforts include visiting prisoners of war, tracing missing
persons, and re-establishing contact between family members
separated by war or disaster.
The Geneva Conventions, among the most widely ratified agreements in
the world, deal with the conduct of warfare and the behavior of combat-
ants. Rules established for the humane treatment of the wounded, sick,
and shipwrecked in battle—as well as prisoners of war—are the foundation
of international humanitarian law. The Geneva Conventions have been
extended to protect civilians caught up in armed conflict, such as hostages.
ICRC/Franco Pagetti
The ICRC partners with the national societies such as the
American Red Cross and Jordanian Crescent Society to bring
emergency relief to disaster victims. Here, needy farmers in
Afghanistan receive seed and food rations from the International
Red Cross.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 71
.Global Issues, Watchdogs, and Advocates
World Health Organization
The World Health Organization (WHO) is a specialized
agency of the United Nations. Its main purpose is to collaborate
with governments, health professionals, and international
organizations to increase the level of health of all people.
WHO has a global strategy to improve primary health care.
WHO also works with international agencies such as the
World Trade Organization and the World Bank to ensure
that international trade agreements and foreign investments
maximize health benefits and minimize health risks to poor
and vulnerable populations.
In Sibiti, Congo, a WHO worker administers the
polio vaccine to a child.


The Peace Palace in The Hague, Netherlands, is where meetings of the International
Court of Justice are held.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 73
.International Law
International Law
The world is made up of approximately 200 nations with strong
ideas about sovereignty and national interests. As these coun-
tries grow increasingly interdependent, their relationships are
challenged by serious issues, including the threat of nuclear war,
terrorism, destruction of the environment, trade imbalances,
famine, and disease control. Often, because of their political,
economic, religious, and cultural views, nations do not agree
about how to address these issues. By applying international
law to specific situations, countries may avoid a conflict that
leads to aggression or outright war.
Public international law considers states (nations) to
be legal entities. The law consists of all the rules, principles,
customs, and agreements that these nations accept as having
the force of law in their relations with each other. International
law is applied as follows.
In international
terms, an
independent
sovereign nation
is called a state
and “country”
often refers to
the geographical
boundaries of a
nation. In this
pamphlet and in
general usage,
the terms state,
nation, and
country mean the
same thing.
Supreme Law
There are two legal theories about national and inter-
national law. One is the monist theory, which proposes
the unity of national and international laws. It suggests
that international law is not only part of a national legal
system, but also superior to national law. Germany’s
legal system is based on the monist theory.
The other theory is the dualist theory, which holds
that the national and international legal systems are
separate and different. According to this theory, inter-
national law cannot be supreme because it is apart
from the national legal system and has no influence on
domestic law.


74 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
International Law.
International Conventions and Treaties. These are formal
pledges between or among nations. Conventions are general
agreements among nations regarding matters of common
concern, such as the Geneva Conventions. Treaties are written
contracts, which are considered legally binding on those nations
that signed the agreements. The United Nations charter is a
multilateral treaty that addresses the agreements, rights, and
duties of U.N. members. Executive agreements are pacts
made between heads of state.
International Customs. These are international rules that have
been practiced so long that courts regard them as unwritten
laws. Most customary laws are based on Western culture and
ideas. The laws are difficult to enforce because many non-West-
ern nations are not likely to agree to the terms of laws
that differ from their own customs.
General Principles of Law. These are general principles found
in the various legal systems of many nations. One example is a
nation’s right to defend itself. The International Court of Justice
may base its rulings on general principles of law, but it is reluc-
tant to do so because many member nations think the Court is
“creating” new laws instead of applying established laws.
Comity of Nations. This is the courteous and friendly practice
between nations of mutually recognizing executive, legislative,
and judicial acts. Comity allows one nation to recognize
another’s laws while still upholding its own laws. This form
of international law is used in diplomatic situations.
International Court of Justice
The International Court of Justice is the judicial organ of the
United Nations. All United Nations members are automatically
members of the ICJ. As a civil court, it applies the rule of law
to international disputes between nations. Its jurisdiction is
twofold: settling international disputes and giving advisory
opinions on legal questions.
Only nations may be party to cases before the Court,
but international organizations can obtain advisory opinions.
In fact, the ICJ will try only those cases in which both nations
agree to accept the judgment of the Court.
Jurisdiction is
the authority to
interpret and
apply the law.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 75
.International Law
Unlike national law, which is supported by a system of
courts and prisons, international law is difficult to enforce. The
lack of power to enforce the law handicaps the Court. However,
nations can enforce international law through economic sanc-
tions like embargoes and the following coercive actions.
Retorsion. A lawful retaliatory act used by a nation to pressure
another nation into reversing an unfriendly act. The action is
identical or similar to the offense, such as imposing high tariffs
or discriminatory duties.
Reprisal. An act of force in response to an illegal action against
a nation. In most circumstances, the retaliatory act itself would
be illegal. However, as a reprisal, it is lawful. For example, if a
country refuses to repay a loan, the lending nation could legally
seize its property.
War. The last resort. Because the consequences of war are so
serious, the threat of war often is sufficient to force a country to
change its ways.
The Security Council has the authority to back the Court’s
judgments but has never used it. Many developing countries are
critical of the International Court of Justice because they believe
that the ICJ is an instrument to further the interests of the first
world nations.
The International Court of Justice has had success in defin-
ing the principles by which disputes are judged. Some of these
principles involve drawing lines to establish territorial sovereignty.
These principles are
applied in disputes about
territorial waters and
fishing rights.
The Court’s actions
include judgments on
hostage-taking, the right
of asylum, rights of
passage, economic
rights, and nationality.
Certain advisory
opinions deal with
the status of human
rights informers and
the threat or use of
nuclear weapons.
An embargo is
a government
restriction or
restraint on trade
of a specific
product or with a
particular nation.
A meeting of the International Court of Justice in The
Hague’s Peace Palace


76 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
International Law.
International Criminal Court
This permanent international criminal court of justice will try
individuals accused of genocide, war crimes, and crimes against
humanity. Its goals are to promote the rule of law and ensure
that those people responsible for the most serious crimes do not
go unpunished. The ICC’s jurisdiction is complementary to
national jurisdictions.
Like the International Court of Justice, the ICC is located
in The Hague, but the two courts are different. The ICJ is part
of the United Nations system, and its purpose is to try civil
disputes between countries. The ICC is an independent criminal
court established to prosecute individuals.
The International Criminal Court does not have the support
of the whole international community. In fact, the United States
decided not to join because the ICC’s general rules of action
conflict with fundamental American beliefs about sovereignty,
checks and balances, and national independence.
The principle of
complementarity
means that
nations have the
primary duty to try
the most serious
international
crimes. The ICC,
however, may
step in as a last
resort if the
nation fails to
act because
its legal system
has collapsed
or because
it is shielding
the person
from prosecution.
Mistaken Identity
Many people confuse The Hague with the United
Nations’ International Court of Justice, but The Hague
is actually a city. And the International Court of Justice
is just one of the many international, diplomatic institu-
tions that call The Hague home. Located on the eastern
coast of the Netherlands, near the nation’s capital city
of Amsterdam, it is truly an international city, with
81 embassies and 46 consulates. More than half of its
residents are actually from other countries!


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 77
.International Law
International Criminal Police Organization
INTERPOL is the world’s largest police organization. It maintains
databases of forensic information (such as DNA and finger-
prints) to share with national law enforcement agencies and
supports them in cooperative efforts to combat international
crime. These crimes between two or more countries include:
• Terrorism
• Financial crimes (money laundering, counterfeiting)
• Trafficking in human beings (smuggling people across borders
for prostitution, forced labor, removal of organs)
• Drug trafficking
• High-tech crimes (computer viruses, identity theft)
• Theft of art work (looting of museums, forgeries)
• Intellectual property crimes (software piracy and counterfeit-
ing of clothing, medicine, and CDs)
International law has had a positive impact on agreements
and treaties concerning telecommunications, mail, health,
weather forecasting, and air and sea transport. It has not had as
much success with controversial issues that infringe on national
sovereignty such as human rights legislation and laws of peace.
Most nations obey international law most of the time.
One of the main reasons the application of international law
works is because the countries recognize the need for order,
stability, and predictability in their international relations.
They know that it is in the mutual interest of all nations to
follow the rules.


U.S. Embassy, Moscow, Russia


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 79
.Representation Abroad
Representation Abroad
A nation advances its foreign policy objectives through foreign
assistance, official representation, and diplomacy. Maintaining
a presence in foreign countries communicates a nation’s values
and goals to the inhabitants of those countries. Participation in
intergovernmental organizations such as the United Nations and
the International Atomic Energy Agency ensures that a nation’s
voice is heard on the international stage.
Representatives are not limited to people acting in an
official capacity. Citizens traveling abroad as tourists, students,
businesspeople, artists, activists, athletes, and humanitarians
are, in the eyes of foreign peoples, representatives of their
countries. How these citizens conduct themselves reflects
on their nations.
Olympic Athletes
Nations all around the world sponsor athletes to repre-
sent their countries at the summer and winter Olympic
Games, which are governed by international agreement.
These ambassador-athletes demonstrate the highest
level of physical skill, discipline, and sportsmanship.
Through their participation in fair and honest competi-
tion, the athletes show the world how to be good
citizens. By acknowledging and respecting the strengths
of others and accepting differences, we can all learn to
compete and cooperate in international arenas. Despite
centuries of wars, abuses, and even scandals, the
Olympic flame still burns.


80 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Representation Abroad.
The U.S. Department of State
The State Department is the lead U.S. foreign affairs agency,
providing direct advice to the president through the secretary
of state and supporting foreign policy programs in other U.S.
government organizations. It develops, conducts, and communi-
cates foreign policy, and coordinates U.S. representation abroad
through Foreign Service employees at our embassies and con-
sulates in foreign countries. The Bureau of Consular Affairs
protects and assists U.S. citizens overseas.
U.S. Agency for
International Development
The United States Agency for
International Development is an inde-
pendent agency that receives general
direction and foreign policy guidance
from the secretary of state. The USAID
manages U.S. economic and humanitari-
an assistance programs to promote sus-
tainable development in more than 100
countries. The programs—administered
through overseas missions in conjunc-
tion with U.S. embassies—concentrate
on the following interrelated areas:
• Improving health and living conditions
• Developing human abilities through education and training
• Promoting economic growth and agricultural development
• Protecting the environment
These programs advance democratic values, encourage
international cooperation, and help to establish economic
conditions that create markets for U.S. goods and services in
developing countries.
The website for the State Department provides
information about foreign policy and world events,
as well as descriptions of every bureau and office,
from Counterterrorism to Oceans and International
Environmental and Scientific Affairs.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 81
.Representation Abroad
Public Diplomacy and Public Affairs
The public diplomacy functions of the former United States
Information Agency (USIA) have been integrated into the
Department of State. The Bureau of Educational and Cultural
Affairs promotes mutual understanding between
the United States and other countries through
exchange activities. Cultural exchanges increase
people’s awareness of traditions and accomplish-
ments in art, music, literature, and science.
Educational exchanges allow students to visit
and study in foreign countries. Academic and
professional exchanges include the Fulbright
Exchange Program and the International
Visitors Program.
The Bureau of International Information
Programs develops strategic communications for
the U.S. foreign affairs community. It produces
electronic and print publications, speaker
programs, and resource services that explain
U.S. policies, society, and values for the media,
government officials, opinion leaders, and the
general public in more than 140 countries.
Although the Voice of America is now part of an indepen-
dent agency, it broadcasts television programs through
Worldnet Television and Film Service, which is part of IIP. The
programs—produced in English and 13 foreign languages—
include international and regional news, public affairs reports
that reflect American life, and discussions on United States for-
eign and domestic policies.
Diplomatic Relations
Under international law, every nation has the right of
legation—the right to send and receive diplomatic representa-
tives. The head of state—also the nation’s chief diplomat—
appoints people to serve as his or her representatives in foreign
countries and at international negotiations. In order to be
recognized as a legal representative, the diplomat must be
accredited to the foreign country or organization by presenting
credentials (formal letters stating that the individual is the
official designate of the head of state) to the foreign government
or governing body.


82 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Representation Abroad.
International law states that all persons within the
boundaries of a sovereign nation are subject to the nation’s
jurisdiction. One exception is diplomatic immunity, which
says that diplomats are not subject to the laws of the nation
to which they are accredited. Diplomats cannot be arrested or
taxed, their residences (embassies) cannot be searched without
their permission, and their official papers and belongings
cannot be seized.
Diplomatic immunity is necessary for nations to conduct
international relations, but it assumes that diplomats will not
abuse their privileges. Occasionally, a diplomat does violate the
local law or offends the government. If the host government
considers the diplomat’s behavior to be unacceptable or
unwelcome, it may declare the diplomat persona non grata
and expel this individual from the country, or ask the sending
country to recall (summon back home) the diplomat. This
withdrawal of recognition of the diplomat’s status as a nation’s
legal representative is the sharpest diplomatic rebuke one
nation can make to another—and it can sometimes lead to war.
Diplomacy is a way for nations to conduct international
relations, communicate foreign policy objectives and values,
and resolve disputes peacefully. It is often called “an invitation
to a dialogue” between two nations.
Embassies, Consulates, and Missions
The United States has diplomatic relations with more than 180
nations. It maintains approximately 260 diplomatic and consular
posts worldwide, including embassies, consulates, and missions to
international organizations.
An embassy is the head-
quarters for a nation’s diplomatic
relations with a host country.
Generally, it is located in the
capital city and is headed by
the top-ranking diplomat (ambas-
sador, minister, or chargé
d’affaires). In a U.S. embassy, the
“chief of mission” (usually the
ambassador) directs all
programs and personnel (except
In 1778, the
Second
Continental
Congress
appointed
America’s first
foreign service
officer when it
chose Benjamin
Franklin to be
minister to France.
U.S. Embassy, Dublin, Ireland


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 83
.Representation Abroad
those nondiplomatic military staff under a U.S. military
commander). As the personal representative of the president,
a U.S. ambassador is responsible for:
• Ensuring that all communications from the embassy about
U.S. foreign policy accurately reflect the nation’s position.
• Providing expert and honest feedback about U.S. interests to
the president and secretary of state.
• Cooperating with U.S. legislative and judicial branches to
advance U.S. foreign policy goals.
• Taking direct responsibility for the security of the embassy
and the protection of all U.S. diplomatic personnel and
their families.
A consulate serves as a branch of an embassy and usually
is located in a large commercial city outside of the capital or in
a dependency of the host country. In the United States, foreign
countries have consulates in major cities such as New York,
Los Angeles, Chicago, Miami, and Houston.
The head consular officer is the consul general.
Diplomatic personnel in a consular office are called consuls.
They are appointed to encourage trade with the host nation and
to take care of their overseas citizens. Consular officers at U.S.
diplomatic posts protect millions of Americans who travel and
live abroad.
Most U.S. ambassadors are career
diplomats trained at the U.S.
Foreign Service Institute in the
State Department. The president
always appoints the ambassador
and often selects someone who
has supported the president’s
election to office.


84 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Representation Abroad.
In order to further U.S. representation abroad, the president
appoints special diplomats—also known as ambassadors—to
top diplomatic posts such as the United Nations or to interna-
tional conferences, such as the Conference on Disarmament.
These official representatives are organized into delegations.
The larger, more permanent delegations are called missions.
The U.S. Mission to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization is
an example of a permanent mission.
Passports and Visas
A passport is an official document issued to a citizen by a
government affirming the individual’s nationality. The passport
permits the citizen to travel or live abroad and entitles the
citizen to privileges guaranteed by international custom and
treaties: safe passage, lawful aid, and protection while under
the foreign government’s jurisdiction.
A visa is a permit to enter another country and must
be issued by the country one wishes to enter. It is a special
seal stamped on a valid passport that indicates an official
of that country has approved the visit. Prior to leaving, the
traveler should apply for a
visa—if required by that
particular country—at the
appropriate foreign embassy
or nearest consulate.
An alien (foreign
national) wishing to enter
the United States must apply
for a visa outside the United
States at embassies and con-
sulates worldwide. An immi-
grant visa permits a person
to stay in the United States
permanently. A nonimmi-
grant visa allows an alien
to enter the country for a
temporary stay. Tourists,
temporary workers, mission-
aries, business professionals,
artists, and athletes travel on
temporary visas.
Every year, thousands of people come to
the United States to get a better education.
They travel with temporary student visas,
then return home to work or help improve
conditions in their own countries.


.Representation Abroad
U.S. Passports
The U.S. Department of State issues more than 7 million pass-
ports a year. Applications are available at post offices and other
municipal buildings, and at the 13 offices of the U.S. Passport
Agency. You also can download an application from the State
Department’s website. More than 5,000 public places accept
completed passport applications.
U.S. citizens traveling abroad can obtain information
about health, security, and general travel tips from consular
information sheets, which the State Department publishes
for every country in the world. The Bureau of Consular Affairs
posts an online version of the consular information sheets
with additional information including voting assistance abroad,
visas for foreigners wishing to come to the United States,
international adoptions, and tips for American students abroad.
To find out what
passport services
are offered where
you live, search
for “United States
Government,
Department of
State, Passport
Agency” and your
city and state on
the internet, with
your parent’s
permission.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 87
.Expand Your Own Borders
Expand Your
Own Borders
Your thoughts about the world are limited to your experience
and knowledge. Yet as you earn the Citizenship in the World
merit badge, you no doubt realize that learning to appreciate
other cultures and traditions is increasingly important in our
interdependent world. You can stretch your understanding
by working for local organizations that support international
causes, attending events that celebrate other cultures or feature
foreign artists or performers, traveling abroad, or participating
in a world Scout jamboree.
World Scouting
The World Organization of the Scout Movement is an interna-
tional Scout association of more than 28 million Scouts from
216 countries and territories. Its main goal is to promote the
integrity and development of the Scout movement worldwide.
The Boy Scouts of America is proud to be the one national
Scout organization from the United States recognized as a
member of the WOSM.
Every four years, the World Organization of the Scout
Movement sponsors a world Scout jamboree, an
international camping experience attended by tens
of thousands of Scouts from all over the globe. These
young people interact, develop friendships, and learn
about other cultures. Jamboree-on-the-Internet takes
place at the same time to enable other Scouts to
participate in the jamboree experience.


88 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Expand Your Own Borders.
The World Organization of the Scout Movement conducts its
activities based on a constitution and has three principal parts.
The World Scout Conference, similar to the General
Assembly in the United Nations, serves as the governing body
of the WOSM. It is composed of all member Scout organiza-
tions. The World Scout Conference meets every three years.
Each member is represented at the conference by a maximum
of six delegates. Observers, like nongovernmental groups at
the United Nations, may attend conferences if approved by
Scout organizations.
The World Scout Committee, a 14-member committee,
serves as the executive branch of the WOSM. This committee
consists of 12 volunteers from different countries (each elected
to a six-year term) plus the secretary-general (who is appointed
by the World Scout Committee) and treasurer of the WOSM.
The committee, which meets every two years, implements
the resolutions of the World Scout Conference and acts on
its behalf between conference meetings. The World Scout
Committee members represent the interests of Scouting as
a whole—not the interests of their own countries.
The World Scout Bureau, directed by the secretary-
general, carries out the instructions of the World Scout
Conference and the World Scout Committee.
Headquartered in Geneva, Switzerland, the World Scout
Bureau also has regional offices: Africa Region, Arab Region,
Asia Pacific Region, Eurasia Region, European Region, and
Interamerican Region.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 89
.Expand Your Own Borders
The World Organization of the Scout Movement reaches
out to other international organizations to improve the lives of
young people in developing nations. In cooperation with the
World Bank, the WOSM helped to create a Children’s and Youth
Policy, which will affect millions of children—including Scouts
in those countries.
Reaching Out
You do not have to go far to have an international experience.
Walk through the produce section in your local grocery store.
You might be surprised that you cannot identify many of the
fruits and vegetables from other countries. Perhaps you and
your family could buy some international foods and make a
special meal. You could learn to cook in the style of another
culture or visit an ethnic restaurant.
Most communities hold special festivals throughout the year
to celebrate a culture or holiday, such as Cinco de Mayo or
Chinese New Year. You also can attend museum exhibits, story-
telling conventions, concerts, and plays.
Hobbies like coin or stamp collecting can teach you about
the history, heroes, architecture, achievements, and cultures of
different countries. Find out more about a popular sport played
in other countries—such as cricket or rugby.
As a BSA
member, you
have an exciting
opportunity to
participate in the
global movement
of Scouting.


90 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Expand Your Own Borders.
Learn a foreign language.
At home or abroad, you will
enjoy talking to people from
another culture in their own
language. In this era of global
economic competition, your
future employment may
depend on your ability to
speak a foreign language.
The U.S. Department of State
and other organizations sponsor
exchange programs for U.S. stu-
dents to study abroad, or for for-
eign students to study in the
United States. Find out if foreign
exchange students attend your
school and make a point to talk to
them. Consider the possibility of
going to school for a semester or
a year in a foreign country.
Nothing matches living in a for-
eign country for understanding
the people’s way of life.
Events such as this parade celebrating
Japanese culture offer an exciting taste
of the kaleidoscope of customs that
exist in our world’s many nations.


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 91
.Expand Your Own Borders
With your parent’s permission, explore the websites
listed in the resources section at the back of this pamphlet.
You will learn about the current events and international issues
that concern policymakers, entrepreneurs, humanitarian groups,
environmentalists, and diplomats everywhere. Pick a topic that
interests you and find out about the organizations that deal
with it. Perhaps your research will inspire you to consider
a career that involves solving an international problem or
improving the lives of people around the world.
Conclusion
Our world is changing at an astonishing pace. On the internet,
ideas flow instantaneously across national borders.
Governments and diplomats can no longer control all
information. Today, power belongs to the people who can
process information quickly and accurately and ask the right
questions. Now individuals can organize themselves to take
action and quickly address the problems in the world.
Rapid globalization affects the world’s economic, social,
and political systems. As more countries participate in the free
market system, competition increases. If Americans want to
remain competitive in the global economy, they must develop
their understanding of mathematics and science as well as
specialized communications and technical skills. As the world
becomes more interdependent, people will find themselves
working on teams with people from other countries. Perhaps
the greatest skill you can learn is how to listen to and cooperate
with people from different cultures.
Citizens in democratic societies have the responsibility not
only to obey the law, but also to be informed. Working on this
merit badge is one of the best ways to “Be Prepared” for the
challenges and opportunities you will face as a Scout and as
a world citizen.





CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 93
.Resources
Scouting Literature
American Business, American Cultures,
American Heritage, American Labor,
Archaeology, Architecture, Citizenship
in the Community, Citizenship in the
Nation, Communications, Energy,
Entrepreneurship, Environmental
Science, Journalism, Law, Public Health,
Soil and Water Conservation, and Space
Exploration merit badge pamphlets
Books
Breuilly, Elizabeth, and Joanne O’Brien,
Martin Palmer, and Martin E. Marty.
Festivals of the World. Checkmark
Books, 2002.
Catel, Patrick. Money and Trade.
Heinemann Library, 2011.
Connolly, Sean. The International
Red Cross (Global Organizations).
The Creative Company, 2009.
———. The World Health Organization
(Global Organizations). The Creative
Company, 2009.
Davis, Wade, K. David Harrison, and
Catherine Herbert Howell, ed. Book
of Peoples of the World: A Guide to
Cultures, 2nd ed. National
Geographic, 2008.
Dresser, Norine. Multicultural Manners:
New Rules of Etiquette for a
Changing Society, revised ed.
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2005.
Fay, Gail. Economies Around the World.
Heinemann Library, 2011.
Freeman, Dena. How People Live.
DK Publishing, 2003.
Heath-Brown, Nick, ed. The
Statesman’s Yearbook: The Politics,
Cultures and Economies of the
World. Palgrave Macmillan, 2016.
Hoose, Phillip. It’s Our World, Too!:
Young People Who Are Making
a Difference. Square Fish, 2002.
La Bella, Laura. How Globalization
Works. Rosen Publishing Group, 2009.
Lewis, Barbara A. The Teen Guide to
Global Action: How to Connect with
Others (Near & Far) to Create Social
Change. Free Spirit Publishing, 2007.
Phillips, Douglas A. Human Rights
(Global Connections). Chelsea
House, 2009.
Senker, Cath. Immigrants and Refugees.
Gareth Stevens, 2010.
Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


94 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Resources.
Shpigler, Debra R. How to Become a
U.S. Citizen, 5th ed. Peterson’s, 2010.
Terraroli, Valerio. Treasury of World
Culture: Monumental Sites, UNESCO
World Heritage. Skira, 2004.
Organizations and Websites
The American Academy of Diplomacy
Telephone: 202-331-3721
www.academyofdiplomacy.org
American Institute for Foreign Study
Toll-free telephone: 866-906-2437
www.aifs.org
Amnesty International USA
5 Penn Plaza, 16th floor
New York, NY 10001
www.amnestyusa.org
British Broadcasting Corporation
www.bbc.com
Cable News Network
www.cnn.com
C-SPAN
www.c-span.org
Embassy Worldwide
www.embassy-worldwide.com/
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
www.federalreserveeducation.org
Foreign, Comparative, and
International Law
lib.law.uw.edu/ref/fcil.html
International Committee of the
Red Cross
www.icrc.org
International Criminal
Police Organization
www.interpol.int
National Constitution Center
525 Arch St.
Independence Mall
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Toll-free telephone: 866-917-1787
www.constitutioncenter.org
The New York Times
www.nytimes.com
Peace Corps
www.peacecorps.gov
Sister Cities International
Telephone: 202-347-8630
www.sistercities.org
United Nations
UN Headquarters
760 United Nations Plaza
New York, NY 10017
www.un.org
United Nations Educational,
Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO)
www.unesco.org
U.S. Agency for
International Development
www.usaid.gov
U.S. Citizenship and
Immigration Services
www.uscis.gov
U.S. Department of State
www.state.gov
U.S. Department of State Youth
Exchange Programs
Telephone: 202-632-9352
exchanges.state.gov/us
U.S. Embassies and Consulates
www.usembassy.gov


CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD 95
.Resources
The Wall Street Journal
www.wsj.com
The Washington Post
www.washingtonpost.com
The World Factbook
www.cia.gov/the-world-factbook
World Health Organization
www.who.int/en
World Organization of the
Scout Movement
www.scout.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the United Nations
Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization for its assistance with
providing many of the photos
herein. This United Nations agency,
which upholds education as a
fundamental human right, has an
initiative called Education for All.
World leaders and delegates from
164 countries have joined and
pledged to provide a quality
“Education for All by 2015.”
Photo Credits
Bureau of Public Affairs, U.S. Department
of State, courtesy—pages 18
(woman with head scarf),
64 (children outdoors and children
at computers), 78, 82, and 83
Carnegie Foundation, courtesy—page 72
ICRC/Thierry Gassmann, courtesy—
page 32
ICRC/Franco Pagetti, courtesy—page 70
Jane Addams School for Democracy,
courtesy—page 10
Karen M. Kraft, courtesy—page 90
(college students)
NATO photos, courtesy—page 18
(men shaking hands and women
shaking hands), and 33


96 CITIZENSHIP IN THE WORLD
Resources.
Pan American Health Organization,
courtesy—page 66
Ryan and Associates, courtesy—page 46
(hotel, McDonald’s, and KFC)
©UNESCO/Felipe Alcoceba, courtesy—
page 37
©UNESCO/Georges Malempré,
courtesy—page 38 (pigs)
©UNESCO/Michael Ravassard,
courtesy—page 28
©UNESCO/Dominique Roger, courtesy—
pages 14, 40, and 44
United Nations photo, courtesy—
pages 7 (man wearing a keffiyeh;
woman wearing a headdress),
9 (boys and women), 68, and 75
United Nations photo/Mark Garten—
page 62
USAID/Thomas Hartwell, courtesy—
page 80
The White House/Pete Souza—page 34
WHO/Sven Torfinn, courtesy—page 71
Wikipedia.org—page 65 (young
boy laborer)
All other photos not mentioned above
are the property of or are protected by
the Boy Scouts of America.
Mark Duncan—cover (currency, passport
cover and page); pages 3, 8,
29 (Scouts), 36, 43, 58, 84, 85
(passport), and 88 (participants
from 2001 National Scout Jamboree)
Brian Payne—page 13
Randy Piland—pages 12, 86 (folk dancers,
American flags, drummers), and 88
(Scouts in tartans)