ATHLETICSSTEM-B a s e d


ATHLETICS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Athletics or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
If meeting any of the requirements for this merit badge is
against the Scout’s religious convictions, the requirement
does not have to be done if the Scout’s parent or guardian and
the proper religious advisors state in writing that to do so would
be against religious convictions. The Scout’s parent or guardian
must also accept full responsibility for anything that might
happen because of this exemption.
35860
ISBN 978-0-8395-3324-5
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing FPO


ATHLETICS 3


4 ATHLETICS


ATHLETICS 5
Contents
Athletics and You . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Ready, Set, Go . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Choosing an Athletic Activity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Athletics for the Fun of It. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
First Aid and Managing Injuries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Athletics Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62


6 ATHLETICS
Athletics and You.
Athletics and You
Being involved in an athletic endeavor is not only a way to
have fun, but it also is one of the best ways for a person to
maintain a healthy and strong body—and make new friends.
By keeping your body in good physical condition, you can
continue to participate in athletics for much of your life, as
well as maintain an active lifestyle. Staying active will also
help you ward off and control health problems that affect
many people, including obesity, diabetes, high blood pressure,
and high cholesterol.
If you observe athletes from a variety of disciplines,
you will notice that most are energetic and have developed
the bodies needed for their particular athletic endeavor. For
instance, swimmers tend to have fully developed shoulder
muscles, whereas sprinters have exceptionally muscular
hamstrings. Serious athletes usually have trained for much
of their lives to keep their bodies in good condition. Athletics is
not only fun, but also a way to help you develop healthy hab-
its for a lifetime.
Before You Begin
All people who participate in athletics should have a thorough
physical examination by their health care provider. An exami-
nation probably will include measuring your heart rate, blood
pressure, height, and weight; checking heart and lung sounds;
testing your reflexes; and
examining your eyes. A health
care provider also may ask
questions and record observa-
tions about your psychosocial
(mental and social) traits,
nutrition habits, physical
activity, and family life.
Before you begin
any fitness
program, be sure
to get your health
care practitioner’s
approval.
Zzzzz. Athletes need plenty of rest to
allow the body to recover from training
or competition. The best rest comes from
a good night’s sleep. As a growing, active
youth, you should get eight to 10 hours
of sleep each night.


ATHLETICS 7
.Athletics and You
During a physical exam, a health care provider may detect
underlying conditions or symptoms that need treatment or
correction or that could prevent or limit a person from partici-
pating in athletics. The provider also may offer advice about
nutrition and how to train safely. Get the green light from your
provider before undertaking athletic activities.
Slow and Easy Start
If you have not been active or are just beginning an athletic pro-
gram, you should start slowly and gradually increase your time
and intensity. For example, a runner might begin by walking
and running for 20 minutes a day, three or four times a week.
Then the next week, the time might be increased to 23 minutes
per workout. You also can gradually lengthen the distance you
run. It can take several weeks to be fit enough to participate in
athletics, so be patient and try not to rush the training.
Your physician will keep a permanent record of your health
history, growth, immunizations, and other data.
Ask your health care provider about vitamins and
minerals. Some sports nutritionists recommend
that athletes take multivitamins, but you should
consult your health care provider before doing so.
Maintaining a balanced diet—eating a variety of
foods—will help ensure that your body gets the
vitamins and minerals it needs for healthy growth,
development, and maintenance.
A great way to
get into shape
for athletics is
to complete the
requirements
for the Personal
Fitness merit
badge. The next
page of this
pamphlet outlines
some other ways
to get moving.


8 ATHLETICS
Athletics and You.
Healthy Habits to Keep a Body Moving
Maintaining a healthy diet is especially important when partici-
pating in athletics. Athletes need energy so they can perform
without tiring easily. Everyone’s dietary needs are different, but
it’s important to eat a well-balanced diet. Make sure each day
to eat something from each of the five food groups: fruits, veg-
etables, grains, dairy products, and proteins. This way,
you will get enough carbohydrates, proteins, and fat, plus the
vitamins and minerals you need to perform at your best.
A great way to get into shape for athletics is to complete the
requirements for the Personal Fitness merit badge. Here are some
other suggestions:
1. Walk around your neighborhood and pick up trash.
2. Plan a scavenger hunt and invite others to join you on the hunt.
3. Hike through a park or nature preserve.
4. Ride a bicycle (and wear a helmet!).
5. Go skateboarding.
6. Fly a kite.
7. Toss a baseball or football with a friend or family member.
8. Build a snow fort or make a snowman.
9. Rake leaves and then jump into the pile.
10. Set up a miniature golf course and play the game.
Note: Be sure to talk to your parent or guardian about your plans.
The 2015–2020
federal dietary
guidelines for
Americans at
www.health.gov/
dietaryguidelines
provides more
tips to help you
make healthy
food choices.


ATHLETICS 9
.Athletics and You
The types of carbohydrates that you eat should be mostly
derived from whole grains and fresh fruits and fresh
or frozen vegetables. Whole-grain bread, bagels,
crackers, cereals, lentils, brown rice, and pasta
all are good sources of carbohydrates.
Growing bodies also need a lot of
protein. Protein helps build and repair
damaged tissue and helps the body
make antibodies to increase a person’s
resistance to disease. Good sources of
protein include fish, poultry, pork, beef,
eggs, beans, and nuts.
Fat is important, too, for energy. It
helps the body use carbohydrates and insulates it in cold
weather. Certain fats, however, are healthier than others.
You should limit foods high in saturated fats, which increase
your cholesterol level and risk of heart disease. Foods that
contain high quantities of saturated fats include meat and
dairy products—butter, eggs, cheese, and whole milk.
Saturated fats typically remain solid at room temperature.
Unsaturated fats are either polyunsaturated or monoun-
saturated, depending on their molecular structure. Most come
from plant sources and are liquid at room temperature. These
are the “good” fats. Try to replace many of the saturated fats
in your diet with unsaturated fats to help you lower your cho-
lesterol level and maintain a healthy heart. Unsaturated fats
are found in oily fish like salmon, albacore tuna, and sardines;
nuts; olives; avocados; canola and nut oils; and vegetable oils
from corn, safflowers, and sunflowers.
Trans fats are formed when vegetable oils are processed
into margarine or shortening through hydrogenation. This
process turns liquid oil into a solid fat at room temperature.
The body has difficulty using these chemically altered fats,
which are used to make french fries, doughnuts, crackers, and
Try to limit your intake of simple carbohydrates—
foods that include refined sugars and white flour—
found in most soft drinks, cookies, pastries, and
most processed foods. Simple carbohydrates break
down quickly in the digestive system, causing energy
“highs” and “lows.”


10 ATHLETICS
Athletics and You.
cookies. Read the labels on packaged food products and try
to avoid eating foods that contain partially hydrogenated or
hydrogenated oil.
Keep your body hydrated by drinking plenty of water
each day. Eight to 10 glasses a day is recommended, though
athletes will probably need more—especially during workouts.
Water helps you stay energized, deal with hot and cold tem-
peratures, and digest food.
Fiber is another important ingredient in your diet.
Sometimes called roughage, fiber cannot be digested, but it
helps push foods through the digestive tract, reducing the
likelihood of constipation. Many whole grains, seeds (such as
sesame and poppy), and fresh fruits and vegetables (especially
broccoli, cauliflower, and cabbage) are high in fiber.


ATHLETICS 11
.Athletics and You
Be sure you are also getting enough calcium. Calcium
is found in dairy products such as milk, cheese, and yogurt,
and foods such as nuts, beans, broccoli, and canned salmon.
Making sure you have at least four servings of calcium daily
will help ensure that your bones stay strong throughout your
life. If you do not get enough calcium in your diet while you
are young, you could be at risk for the bone-thinning disease
called osteoporosis.
Failing to fuel and refuel your body with good foods can
lead to fatigue and injury; you will also be more likely to get
sick. Develop good eating habits now so that they will become
second nature to you throughout your lifetime.
Avoiding Tobacco, Alcohol, and
Other Harmful Substances
Drugs have no place in training or competition. To be a strong,
healthy performer in athletics and in life, avoid tobacco,
alcohol, and other harmful substances.
Tobacco and athletics do not mix. Athletes need to
breathe. They need their lungs working at peak capacity.
Smoking makes you cough and wheeze, and it interferes with
proper lung growth and lung function. It injures the airways
and air sacs of the lungs. Using tobacco can leave you gasping
for air when you need it most.
Smoking not only reduces athletic performance and stamina,
it damages nearly every organ in the body.
The blood carries the poisons from smoking to all parts
of the body, damaging internal organs from the brain to the
bladder. Scientists now know that smoking causes cancers of
Think Small
Many people follow the traditional three-square-meals-a-day routine.
However, many sports nutritionists recommend that athletes eat five
smaller meals per day. This will help normalize blood sugar and insulin
levels more efficiently than eating three larger meals each day. When
your blood sugar spikes, or rises, you will get a quick burst of energy
for a short period of time, but you soon will experience a strong dip in
energy. Smaller meals—about one every three hours throughout the
day—will give you a more consistent energy supply.
For more
information about
nutrition and
physical fitness,
read the Cooking
and Personal
Fitness merit
badge pamphlets.


12 ATHLETICS
Athletics and You.
the mouth, the larynx (voice box), the lungs, and the kidneys.
It can also cause a type of leukemia—a cancer of the blood.
You might have heard that smoking causes heart disease, but
did you know that it raises the risk for stroke, and damages
the body’s ability to fight infection? Smokers are at high risk of
dying from any number of tobacco-related diseases.
Cigarettes can contain dozens of dangerous and cancer-
causing chemicals, including arsenic (used in pesticides
and weed killers), benzene (a toxic solvent), formaldehyde
(used to embalm corpses), and polonium 210 (a highly
radioactive element). Smoking “casually” or “occasional-
ly” is the same thing as taking poison occasionally. If you
wouldn’t drink embalming fluid now and then, why would
you smoke, even once in a while?
Alcohol is a depressant. It interferes with reflexes and coor-
dination. It slows an athlete’s reaction time and impairs balance,
vision, hearing, and judgment. Alcohol dehydrates tissues in the
body. Drinking water or a sports drink will replace body fluids
that are lost from exertion during athletic activities or workouts.
Drinking beer or other alcoholic beverages has the opposite
effect—alcohol makes the drinker thirstier.
A hangover—the “day-after” effect of consuming alcohol—
is marked by headaches, nausea, diarrhea, dehydration, fatigue,
and body aches that can diminish athletic performance. The
long-term harmful effects of alcohol abuse can include damage
to brain and nerve function, weakening of the heart muscle,
abnormal blood clotting, and liver failure leading to death.
Steroids mimic the effects of the natural male hormone
testosterone. Testosterone triggers the maturing of the male
reproductive system in puberty. Taking steroids disrupts the
body’s natural hormone balance, causing dangerous physical
and mental abnormalities. Though steroids are sometimes called
“performance-enhancing” drugs, they do not improve agility,
skill, or cardiovascular capacity. They act to artificially increase
muscle mass at a high cost to the user’s health. When used by
female athletes, steroids can cause significant cosmetic and
reproductive changes.
If you smoke,
you choke.


ATHLETICS 13
.Athletics and You
Side effects range from acne, bloating, and rapid weight
gain, to weakened tendons, blood-clotting disorders, liver dam-
age, and heart attacks and strokes. The damage to a steroid
user’s health can be irreversible and may not show up for
months, years—even decades—after the abuse ends. Young
people who take steroids may stop growing. The drugs prevent
young bones from lengthening, so that steroid users might fail
to grow as tall as they should. Athletes who start using steroids
often have trouble stopping. Evidence suggests that steroid
abusers show the classic symptoms of addiction, including crav-
ings, difficulty quitting, and withdrawal pains.
Amphetamines are stimulants. Commonly called “uppers,”
these highly addictive drugs create false feelings of power,
strength, and assertiveness. They do not give a user extra physi-
cal or mental energy; they impair judgment and distort the user’s
view of reality. An athlete on uppers may ignore an injury and
suffer permanent physical damage. Amphetamines suppress
appetite and may cause extreme, life-threatening weight loss.
Other side effects include nerve damage, uncontrollable and
abnormal movements of the face and jaw muscles, convulsions,
hallucinations, and mental disorders such as paranoia and delu-
sions similar to schizophrenia. Amphetamines damage blood
vessels throughout the body. Users may die from ruptured blood
vessels in the brain or from heart attacks.
Other drugs—cocaine and crack, heroin, inhalants, LSD,
marijuana—also have powerful effects on the body and the
mind. They can produce temporary feelings of pleasure or ener-
gy, but they can also cause nightmares, depression, and severe
mental disturbances. Because the amount of an illegal drug that
is swallowed, smoked, inhaled, or injected is not controlled by
a doctor, the amount a user will take can be unpredictable. An
overdose can result in serious illness, disability, or death.
Steroids can
cause severe
mood swings,
from deep
depression to
extreme irrita-
bility. ‘Roid rage
is a term for
the explosive,
out-of-control
aggressiveness
associated with
steroid use.
From the Scouts BSA Handbook
Lord Baden-Powell, Scouting’s founder, had faith that Scouts were smart
enough to figure out what is healthy and right. He urged Scouts not to
let others pressure them into using substances that can cause harm.
"And if you have been foolish," he said, "there is no law that says you
must stay that way."


14 ATHLETICS
Ready, Set, Go.
Ready, Set, Go
You will find that whatever fitness
endeavor you undertake, you will
be physically challenged as well as
mentally challenged. Sometimes
you will be mentally alert in your
activity and perform well. At other
times, you may have some negative
feelings and your performance might
suffer. Learning to maintain a positive
attitude and face up to athletic chal-
lenges is as much a part of training as being physically ready.
A study conducted by the U.S. Military Academy at
West Point, New York, showed that students who
scored higher on physical performances were less
likely to drop out of the academy than those who
were less physically fit.
Training
When training for an athletic activity, monitor your progress
by making a chart or log. Keeping a progress chart will help
you determine whether you are improving and if your training
schedule is one you can follow. You will be able to customize
your schedule to suit your fitness level. Remember to judge
your progress and how you perform based on your own
abilities. Do not compare yourself against the abilities of
other athletes.
As you work on requirement 5, use the sample charts
provided later in this pamphlet to help you track
your progress.
Being an effective
athlete takes both
physical and
mental stamina.


ATHLETICS 15
.Ready, Set, Go
Warming Up, Cooling Down
It is important to warm up before beginning any activity, and
to cool down after your training and competition. add Your
warm up and cool down should include low-level activity and
stretching.
The key to warming up is taking it slow and easy. This
helps raise your heart rate and increases the blood flow to
your muscles, supplying them with nutrients and oxygen.
Also, your body’s temperature increases, which enhances the
elasticity (flexibility) of your muscles, ligaments, and tendons.
This prepares your body for harder work and helps reduce the
risk of injury.


16 ATHLETICS
Ready, Set, Go.
Other good warm-up exercises include jumping jacks,
push-ups, running in place, arm rotations, and other calisthen-
ics. You also can lift light weights to prepare your muscles for
heavier lifting.
Cooling off after a workout or competition is important.
Keep moving after your activity is finished. Stopping suddenly
or neglecting the cool-down period could cause cramps in your
muscles. After a run, for example, walk or jog slowly for at
least a half-mile. Continue to move and then stretch for several
more minutes after that.
Warm up with a slow jog of about 10 minutes. After
your workout, cool down then stretch with a slow jog
or walk of about 10 minutes.
Jumping rope is one simple way
to warm up and improve your
cardiovascular aerobic endurance
and coordination. Start out slow
and easy. You can do several
different jumps with a rope. The
single-foot hop is jumping as the
rope passes under your foot once.
Hold one foot up while jumping
and then alternate feet. With double
jumps, the rope must pass under
both feet while you are in the air. Try
alternating single and double jumps.
The two-foot jump includes a
small hop as the rope clears your
feet once before jumping again. To
do the boxer’s shuffle, alternate your
right and left feet as the rope passes
under each one time. To perform
crossovers, while the rope is
turning forward, cross the rope by
fully crossing your arms when the rope passes your head. Repeat with
the rope turning backward. Start out with 15 to 20 repetitions of each
jump. Work up to as many as 50 or more.
Crossover jump


ATHLETICS 17
.Ready, Set, Go
S-t-r-e-t-c-h
After participating in any athletic activity,
stretch your muscles as part of an
effective cool down. Move slowly
and do not bounce while
stretching.
Stretch after
physical activity,
because the
muscles are fully
warmed up. Do
not stretch cold
muscles. Be sure
to stretch under
the supervision
of a qualified
coach or trainer.Seat Straddle Lotus. Sit down, place the soles of your feet
together, and drop your knees toward the floor. Place your
forearms on the inside of your knees and push your knees
toward the ground. Lean forward, bringing your chin to your
feet; hold this position for five seconds. Repeat this exercise
three to six times.
Seat Side Straddle. Sit with your legs spread apart. Place both hands on the same
ankle. Bring your chin to your knee, keeping your leg straight, and hold this position
for five seconds. Do this three to six times. Repeat exercise on opposite leg.


18 ATHLETICS
Ready, Set, Go.
Seat Stretch. Sit with your legs together,
feet flexed, and your hands on your
ankles. Bring your chin to your knees;
hold this position for five seconds.
Repeat this exercise three to six times.
Lying Quad Stretch. Lie on your side
with one leg straight and the other leg
with your leg and hip turned inward
and knee bent. Press the bent knee
toward the floor; hold this position for
five seconds. Do this three to six times.
Repeat this exercise with the opposite
knee bent.
Knees to Chest. Lie on your back with
your knees bent. Grasp the tops of your
knees and bring them out toward the
armpits, rocking gently. Hold this
position for five seconds. Repeat this
exercise three to five times.
Forward Lunge. Kneel on your left leg
and place your right leg forward at a
right angle to the floor. Lunge forward,
keeping your back straight. You should
feel this stretch in the left groin area.
Hold this position for five seconds.
Repeat the lunge three to six times,
then do it with the opposite leg.


ATHLETICS 19
.Ready, Set, Go
Side Lunge. Stand with your legs
apart. Bend your left knee while
leaning toward the left. Keep your
back and your right leg straight.
Hold this position for five seconds.
Repeat this exercise three to
six times, then do it with the
opposite leg.
Standing Quad Stretch. Stand supported,
if necessary. Pull one foot to your buttocks;
hold this position for five seconds. Repeat
this exercise three to six times, then do it
with the opposite leg.
Crossover. Stand with your legs crossed.
Keep your feet close together and your
legs straight. Touch your toes and hold
this position for five seconds. Repeat
this exercise three to six times, then
switch positions.





ATHLETICS 21
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Choosing an
Athletic Activity
Choose an activity that matches your body type and abilities.
During the year, you might want to participate in a variety of
athletic activities so that you gain overall fitness. This also can
help you determine which athletic endeavor you like the best.
Participating in an athletic activity means taking the time
to learn the rules and proper training methods. For instance,
if you enter a track and field competition, you should find
out the official rules and regulations posted by USA Track and
Field (USATF), the governing body for track and field events.
Your coach can help you learn about the official rules and
regulations of the activity you choose and can make sure that
you have the right equipment and attire.
Progress Charts
Use charts to monitor your progress for three months in four
of the groups listed in requirement 5. You may want to prac-
tice and train throughout the week and then test yourself each
Saturday. At the end of the three months, you will be able to
see how much you have improved.
Start out slowly and work to improve upon your perfor-
mance, such as your mileage in running, distance in swimming,
height in jumping, and weight amount in weight training. Each
time you work out, note what you did and include other obser-
vations such as how you felt before and after your workout,
what you ate that day, how many hours you slept the night
before, and so on. For basketball, you could switch out differ-
ent drills for your workouts. You might practice shooting for
accuracy on one day and for skill and agility the next. Be sure
to warm up, cool down, and stretch after your training session
no matter which activity you choose.
Ask your merit
badge counselor
or coach for help
in learning
the rules and
regulations for the
athletic activities
you pursue.


22 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
Exercise Log Week ______________ Week _______________ Week _______________
Exercise Description Su M T W Th F Sa Su M T W Th F Sa Su M T W Th F Sa


ATHLETICS 23
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Activity Start Week 2 Week 3 Week 4 Week 5 Week 6 Week 8 Week 10 Week 12
Group 1: Sprinting
100-meter dash
200-meter dash
Group 2: Long-Distance
Running
3k run
5k run
Group 3: Long Jump
OR High Jump
Running long jump
OR running high jump
Standing long jump
OR standing high jump
Group 4: Swimming
100-meter swim
200-meter swim
Group 5: Pull-ups and
Push-ups
Pull-ups in two minutes
Push-ups in two minutes
Group 6: Baseball Throw
Baseball throw for
accuracy, 10 throws
Baseball throw
for distance, 5 throws
(total distance)
Group 7: Basketball
Basketball shot for
accuracy, 10 free-throw
shots


24 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
Basketball throw for
skill and agility (see
the basketball key
diagram provided)
1. Left-side layup
2. Right-side layup
3. Left side of hoop,
along the key line
4. Right side of hoop,
along the key line
5. Where key line and
free-throw line meet,
left side
6. Where key line and
free-throw line meet,
right side
7. Top of the key
8. Anywhere along the
three-point line
Group 8: Football Kick
OR Soccer Kick
Goals from the 10-yard
line, eight kicks
Football kick or soccer
kick for distance, five
kicks (total distance)
Group 9: Weight Lifting
Chest/bench press, two
sets of 15 repetitions each
Leg curls, two sets of
15 repetitions each
The information from your progress chart can help you determine whether you need to alter your diet, if you are getting
enough rest, and how much—if any—you are improving.


ATHLETICS 25
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Name Your Game
To fulfill requirement 5, you will need to complete the activi-
ties in four of the nine groups listed here, showing improve-
ment over a three-month period.
Sprinting
Sprinting requires good posture, balance, overall strength and
stability, and a smooth and efficient running style. It takes
great patience to get faster, but with help from a knowledge-
able coach, you should see some improvement over time.
In competitions, sprinters usually use starting blocks.
However, it is not necessary for you to use them to meet this
requirement. At a track meet, you should be prepared to follow
the race official’s direction. At the start of a race, the official
will give runners several commands so that everyone is pre-
pared to take off at the same time.
The first command is “On your marks”—the signal for
runners to crouch down and position their feet (10 to 14 inches
apart, with the front foot about 8 to 12 inches or so ahead of
the back foot) at the starting line. Bend down and place each
hand on the track about a shoulder’s width apart so that your
thumbs and forefingers are directly parallel to (and behind) the
starting line. The toe and knee of your back leg should touch
the ground.
Jumping rope
is an excellent
exercise for
sprinters because
the short skipping
and hopping
movements help
improve muscle
elasticity in
the legs.
The back foot is your dominant foot, the one you use to kick a ball. Your
dominant leg is slightly stronger than your other one, so you will use it
to take your first stride.
“On your marks.”


26 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
Next comes the command “Set,”
which calls for you to raise your back
and hips just above shoulder height.
Bend your front leg at about 90 degrees
and straighten your back leg. Keep your
hands positioned at the starting line
with elbows turned inward and locked.
This movement will shift your body
weight forward. Let your head hang
naturally, but focus your eyes two or
three feet in front of the starting line,
not down.
At the “Go” command, keep your
head down during the first stride. Your
lead arm (on the same side as your
front leg) will shoot upward and ahead
to lead your rear leg across the start-
ing line. Your rear leg pushes off to
thrust your body forward. Then your
other arm comes up and your front leg
pushes forward. Each time your foot
touches the ground, your leg should
fully extend.
Bend your arms at an angle
between 90 and 110 degrees during this
driving phase, and keep pumping both arms quickly to help
build and maintain momentum and speed. On the backswing,
bring your arm back so that your elbow is higher than your
shoulder. As your arm moves forward, bring your hand up to
your chin. Do not allow your arms to crisscross.
During training, practice your form following the three
commands, then run as fast as you can for three to five strides
once you leave the starting line. As always, start out slow
when you begin to train—three to five starts in the beginning,
gradually building up to about 20 starts. Be prepared to run
100 or 200 meters at full speed each Saturday, or once a week,
in order to track your progress.
“Go!”
In cold weather, it is especially important for runners to warm up
carefully and stay warm. Otherwise, an injury such as a pulled hamstring
could set you back at least several weeks.
“Set.”
As you sprint, look
straight ahead—
not behind you
or to the side.
Doing so will
slow you down.


ATHLETICS 27
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Long-Distance Running
Begin a training program that slowly builds up your mileage.
By gradually increasing the distance you run each week, you
will strengthen your muscles, tendons, and ligaments as your
body begins adapting to the extra stress. Depending on your
physical condition, you could start by running a half-mile to a
mile three to four days a week. Keep your pace fairly slow; do
not run what you would consider an all-out effort.
Try to increase your distance each week by about
10 percent. For example, if you are running 3 miles a week,
you could increase the mileage to 3.3 miles the next week, and
so on until you reach the weekly mileage you desire. As with
any training program, it is important to make gradual increases
in mileage and intensity as you try to improve your speed.
Running Long Jump
For the running long jump, you will sprint
down a runway, take off from a mark or
board at the end of the runway, leap as far
as possible, and land in a pit filled with
sand. The sprint down the runway can
be any distance. Do a few practice runs;
mark the spot you need to hit with your
take-off foot and determine how many
strides you need. When you reach the
board or mark, take off in a powerful for-
ward and upward direction. Concentrate
on keeping your chest high and bringing
your knees up. You should land on your
heels and swing your arms forward. Hunch
your head and shoulders over your knees so you don’t fall
backward and make a mark behind your heels in the sand.
Your jump will be measured from the edge of the mark or
board to the nearest point of contact. If you touch the ground
beyond the board before you jump, it is considered a foul and
counts as a jump. Each competitor gets three jumps, with the
best jump counted. Remember to track your progress.
A general guideline says that if you are running and
still able to hold a conversation with another person,
you are probably training efficiently.
Running long jump
Be sure to get the
right shoes for the
type of activity in
which you plan
to participate and
get shoes that
fit properly.


28 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
Standing Long Jump
The procedure is the same as for the
running long jump, but you make
your jump from a standing position at
the jump line, without running. You
may rock back and forth from heels to
toes before jumping, but if either foot
leaves the ground or slides, it counts
as a jump. Crouch, lean forward, and
swing your arms backward, then jump
horizontally as far as possible with
both feet into the jumping pit. Track
your progress.
Running High Jump
Your running approach to the bar before
jumping is the key element in a success-
ful running high jump. In a hard but
controlled manner, run slowly toward
the bar and accelerate as you near it.
Your approach to the bar should be a
curve, much like the letter J. You usually
will begin the jump at about arm’s
length away from the bar. Your body
should go straight up and not toward
the bar. Many coaches teach that the
last step should be a shorter, faster step.
Practice your approach to deter-
mine how many strides you need for
your takeoff. Do a few practice runs; mark the spot you need to
hit with your takeoff foot, and count how many strides you take.
The bar is set at a minimum height and raised each time
the jumper clears a particular height. You have three jumps to
clear each height of the bar. Track your progress.
Standing long jump
The most popular technique for the running high jump is called the Fosbury
Flop. It is named after Dick Fosbury, who made the technique famous in the
1968 Olympics when he won the gold medal. Have your coach show you
the proper technique of either the Fosbury Flop (jumping headfirst with
your back facing the ground as you clear the bar) or the straddle-style jump,
in which you go over frontward with one leg leading.
Running high jump


ATHLETICS 29
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Standing High Jump
The same procedure applies as for the standing long jump,
except that you must jump up as high as possible over a bar
without a running start. Your feet leave the ground only once,
just as you make your attempt. You may rock back and forth
from your heels to toes, but if either foot leaves the ground or
slides, it counts as a jump. Remember to track your progress.
Swimming
The most basic stroke in swimming is the front crawl. Start
by practicing the flutter kick, which relies on relaxed ankles
and the use of the entire leg. Movement begins at the hips
and flows to the feet. Point your feet and keep your knees
almost straight, kicking in a beating or fluttering rhythm. Keep
the kick smooth and steady, between 8 to 12 inches and just
below the water’s surface.
For the arm stroke, extend
your right arm forward—keeping
your fingers together and slightly
cupped—and bring it down and
back to your hip, pushing water
toward your feet; then raise that
elbow to extend your arm forward
again. Alternate with your left arm.
Kick and use the arm stroke in uni-
son to glide through the water.
Exhale through your mouth
and nose while your face is in the
water. To inhale, roll your head to
one side as the arm on that side
reaches your hip and the elbow is lifting out of the water.
Inhale through your mouth, then turn your face back into the
water as your arm is recovering to the extended position in
front of you. Start with a 100-meter swim and gradually work
up to a 200-meter swim. Track your progress.
For all jumping
events, be sure to
take training slow
and easy. The
jumping and
landing will be
hard on your body.
Front crawl
To perfect your
swim stroke, work
closely with your
swimming coach.
Warming up is important in swimming, too. Start
your workout with a slow, easy swim at medium
speed for 50 to 100 yards before the most strenuous
part of the workout.


30 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
Pull-up
Using a bar about 6 inches above your upper reach, begin by
hanging from the bar with your arms fully extended, palms
forward and directly above your shoulders. Pull up until you
can touch the top of the bar with the bottom of your out-
stretched chin. Record the total number of pull-ups you
complete. Track your progress.
If you have a hard time doing pull-ups, begin your exer-
cise training by doing modified pull-ups. This could include
doing “chin-ups” by holding the bar with your palms facing
you, using a lower bar so you don’t pull your entire body
weight up; or if the bar is low enough, “jumping” up to help
propel yourself. Another method is demonstrated on page 42
using machine weights.
Pull-up
Whenever you are outdoors, be sure to protect your-
self from the sun with sunscreen. Your sunscreen
should have a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least
30. Give special attention to your face, ears, nose,
and neck. If you are sweating or if you go swim-
ming, reapply sunscreen more frequently.


ATHLETICS 31
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Push-up
Start out with the modified push-up. Lie face down with your
arms bent, the palms of your hands flat against the floor and
under your shoulders. Keeping your spine and neck straight,
let your knees serve as support while you push yourself up-
ward until your arms are fully extended. Try not to lock your
elbows. Slowly lower yourself back to the floor, then repeat.
For the modified push-up, you will keep your shoulders,
hips, and legs in a straight line from the knees to the head. As
your strength increases, shift to the regular push-up position
with your weight on your hands and toes. A good guideline to
follow is that, if you can do 10 modified push-ups without dif-
ficulty, you should switch to regular push-ups. Keep your spine
and legs in a straight line. Record the total number of push-ups
you complete. Track your progress.
Modified push-up
Regular push-up
Drink plenty of
water during your
workouts. Water
not only keeps you
hydrated, but also
helps fight fatigue.


32 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
Baseball Throw
Remember to warm up and stretch before you begin. Start with
a few short and easy throws, then gradually build up distance
and speed during your workouts. It is especially important to
work closely with your coach on your form. Stand with your
body sideways, in line with your target. Hold the baseball
using your first two fingers and thumb, not the palm of your
hand. Usually, the first two fingers go across the seams (where
they are close together) with the thumb underneath. When
throwing, cock your wrist as your arm goes back. Reach back
as far as you are comfortable, and release the ball as your arm
goes forward. Throw the ball “over the top,” not sideways.
For the accuracy test, see how many times in 10 throws
you can directly strike a target from a predetermined distance.
To practice for distance throws, ask a friend to spot the ball
when it first touches the ground. Track your progress.
Use your body when you throw:
shift your weight to your back foot
as you wind up and then transfer
your weight to your front foot as you
release the ball. Allow your throwing
arm to follow through.
To make a quick
target, use an old
pillow that is about 15 by
24 inches in size. Draw or
paint a strike zone on the
pillow. Then, strap the pillow
about 2 feet high on a wire
backstop, fence, or other
stable fixture in a
clear area.
Before you start
to throw, warm up
your arm gradually
by throwing your
baseball at
slow speed to
someone at a
close distance.
The distance requirement for the
baseball throw is based on age:
ages 11 to 12, 20 feet; ages 13 to
15, 30 feet; and ages 16 to 17,
40 feet.


ATHLETICS 33
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Basketball
As you practice basketball drills, remember to warm up
before you begin, and then cool down following your
workouts. Use the diagram of the basketball court to plan
your practice shots. Track your progress.
Basic tips for dribbling:
• Keep your head up.
• Push down on the ball with your fingers.
• Keep your dribbling elbow close to your body.
For shooting layups:
• When dribbling to the basket from the right side, shoot
with your right hand as your right leg goes up, while
pushing off on your left leg.
• When approaching from the left side, shoot with your
left hand as your left leg goes up, while pushing off with
your right leg.
For shooting:
• Keep your elbow in and your fingertips on the basketball.
Spread your feet about shoulder width, and bend your
knees slightly. Look at a spot just
over the front of the rim.
• Before you shoot, relax by exhaling.
• Shoot with one hand and use the
other as a guide. Spread your
fingers comfortably. Dribble a couple
of times, and then cock the ball to
your chest or wherever it feels good
to shoot.
• Point your forearm toward the basket
as you cock your wrist, and position
the ball as if you are carrying a tray.
• As you shoot, move your arm up
and forward, keeping your shoulders
square to the basket.
• Shoot the ball off your fingertips, and
follow through by extending your
arm and hand toward the basket.
Proper layup form
Remember to
follow through.
Preparing to
shoot the ball


34 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
Kicking a Football or Soccer Ball
Many football kickers use a soccer-style tech-
nique, so you can use these basic techniques
to kick either ball. Warm up before you start,
and practice your kicking technique without
the ball first. Track your progress.
For football, you must determine how
many steps to take before you kick the ball.
One technique is to face the ball and take
three normal steps back from the ball and
two steps to the left, if you are right-footed
(to the right, if you are left-footed). The ball
should be slightly tipped back and the laces
should be facing your target. You may have
to experiment with tilting the ball right or
left before you are comfortable kicking goals.
Slightly bend your supporting leg as you kick.
Keep your head up but lower your eyes to
watch the ball. The follow-through should
be long and smooth. Track your progress in
accuracy and distance.
In soccer, the technique is the same as
for football. Approach the ball with smooth,
controlled steps, and kick the ball about
2 inches below the widest part of the ball, or
about a third of the way up from the bottom
of the ball, with the shoe-laced part of your
foot, not your toe. The largest bone in your
foot is underneath your shoelaces; this
is where you want to make contact with the
ball. Watch this spot until after you have
kicked the ball. Keep your shoulders square
to your target as you swing your kicking
leg through the ball, letting your other leg
support you. Follow through toward the
target. Track your progress for accuracy
and distance.


ATHLETICS 35
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Weight Training
Weight training, a form of strength training, has many benefits.
In addition to increasing your strength and improving your
muscle tone, weight-bearing activities will help you lose fat,
improve your bone density and resistance to injury, strengthen
your heart, and increase your coordination. If you are new to
weight training, weight machines are more practical for your
workout than training with free weights because the machines
can be adjusted to fit you and many do not require a spotter.
You are still growing, so it is important to start weight
training slowly. Your counselor or trainer may recommend
that you begin with body-weight exercises such as pull-ups and
push-ups.
Whenever you participate in weight training activities, it is
important to do so only under the supervision and guidance of
a knowledgeable trainer. Only after you have trained and feel
comfortable with your current workout should you think about
increasing the weight load. With your trainer’s guidance, you
can determine how much that increase should be—normally
about five percent for young athletes.
Weight training routines are built around repetitions
and sets. A repetition is a series of a single exercise. A set is
a group of repetitions of that exercise. For example, to meet
weight training requirement 5(a), you must complete two sets
of 15 repetitions for the chest/bench press. This means you
must do the chest/bench press 15 times in a row to complete
one set, rest, and then do the chest/bench press another 15
times in a row to complete your second set.
Free weights—dumbbells, weight plates, and barbells—
are used for physical conditioning and competitive
weightlifting. Each piece of equipment is of a specific
weight. These weights are “free” because they do not
restrict joint movement. Because of this freedom of
movement, you can use the weights for many differ-
ent exercises, but you can also suffer more injuries
than with weight machines if you do not use correct
loading, lifting, and spotting techniques.
Try not to
schedule two
hard workout
days in a row.
You might even
plan two easy
days between
your hard
days. Rest
and recovery
are important
factors in your
improvement.


36 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
The chest/bench press increases upper-body strength by
working all muscles in the chest. Weight machines will vary,
but the technique is basically the same.
Step 1—Lie with your head, shoulders, back, and bottom
on the bench. Be sure your head is at least 2 inches from the
stack of weights. Position your feet firmly on the floor.
1
A basic weight training program should include exercises for the shoulders, chest,
arms, abdomen, back, and legs. Talk to your coach and your trainer to determine
which exercises best suit the activities you have chosen to participate in for a season.


ATHLETICS 37
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Step 2—Bring your arms in front of you, but do not lock your
elbows. With your hands about shoulder width apart, grip the
handles. Lower the handles to your chest.
Step 3—Exhale as you push the handles up to full elbow
extension. Hold the weight momentarily.
Step 4—Pull handles down,
inhaling as you return to the
starting position.
Pause for a moment before
starting the next repetition.
3
Weight training requires constant supervision by a qualified trainer
who is knowledgeable in this activity’s techniques and training.
2


38 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
The leg curl strengthens your hamstrings, the muscles on
the backs of your thighs. Again, leg curl machines will vary,
but the technique is basically the same.
Step 1—Lie facedown on the
bench. (If the bench you are
using does not have a slight
angle, put a towel under
your hips.) Grip the handles,
keeping your elbows tucked
against the bench. Position the
backs of your ankles against
the roller pads.
Step 2—Slowly bend your
knees and raise your feet,
keeping your hips planted
against the bench.
Step 3—When you
reach the top, hold that
position momentarily.
1
3
2


ATHLETICS 39
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Step 4— Slowly lower your feet
to the starting position. Pause for
a moment before starting the next
repetition.
Because weight training is so
important for developing groups
of muscles required for specific
sports and for conditioning your
body for general health, more
weight machine exercises are
included here to help you
develop a personal weight
training program.
The leg extension develops
the quadriceps, which are
the muscles on the front of
your thighs.
Step 1—Sit in a leg extension machine and position the tops
of your feet under the roller pads. Grip
the handrails.
Step 2—Use your thighs to slowly lift
your lower legs.
Step 3—Hold the position while your
quadriceps contract.
Step 4—Slowly lower your legs to the
starting position.
1
Weight training is most beneficial when paired with
aerobic exercise, for example, running, swimming,
or cycling.
2
3


40 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
The leg press develops the
quadriceps as well as the hamstrings
and gluteal muscles in your buttocks.
Step 1—Sit in a leg press machine,
with your back against the seat, legs
bent at a 90-degree (or less) angle,
feet about shoulder-width apart
and flat on the weight sled (pedal
surface). Hold on to the handrails,
keeping your arms straight.
Step 2—Unlock the weight sled
and bend your knees, slowly
lowering the weight.
Step 3—Push the weight back up
by extending your legs to a straight
position. Exhale as you push.
Step 4—Slowly return your legs
to the starting position, with your
knees flexed at 90 degrees. Inhale as
you bend your knees.
1
3
2


ATHLETICS 41
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
The pec-deck flye is another exercise that works the
chest muscles.
Step 1—Sit on the machine with your back against the seat
pad. Grasp the handles, keeping your upper arms parallel to
the floor and your elbows with a slight bend in them. Your
forearms should remain in contact with the pads at all times.
Step 2—Flex your chest while bringing the handles together in
a smooth, steady motion.
Step 3—When the pads almost touch,
hold the position for a second.
Step 4—Slowly reverse the movement
to the starting position.
1
3
2


42 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
The pull-down to front works upper back and
shoulder muscles.
Step 1—Sit in the lat machine seat with your feet flat on the
floor. Grasp the bar with a wide overhand grip. Puff up your
chest, arch your back, and lean slightly backward.
Step 2—Using your back muscles, pull
the bar toward the top of your chest,
moving your arms only.
Step 3—Pull your elbows down and
back as far as possible until the bar
touches your chest.
Step 4—Squeeze your shoulder blades
together for one second before slowly
returning to the starting position.
3
21


ATHLETICS 43
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
The seated row exercise develops upper back muscles.
Step 1—Sit down at the rowing station and bend your
knees slightly. Keep your upper body erect. Securely grip the
rowing handles.
Step 2—Pull the handle slowly and smoothly to your chest.
Keep your upper body rigid and knees flexed. Exhale as the
handle nears your chest.
Step 3—Return to the starting position, inhaling as you
complete the movement.
1
2


44 ATHLETICS
Choosing an Athletic Activity.
The low pulley biceps
curl develops the biceps,
which are muscles in the
front of the upper arm.
Step 1—With your body
erect and knees slightly bent,
grasp the bar with an under-
hand grip. Keep your head
up, looking forward. Extend
your elbows fully and let the
bar rest on your thighs.
Step 2—Pull the bar up
to shoulder level without
moving your upper arms.
Exhale as the bar comes
to your shoulders.
Step 3—Hold the position for a second.
Step 4—Slowly lower the bar to the starting position, keeping
your head up and inhaling during the downward movement.
Fully extend your elbows before starting the next repetition.
The triceps pulley press-down works the
triceps, which are muscles in the back of the
upper arm.
Step 1—Stand about a foot away from a lat bar,
then grasp the bar with an overhand grip—hands
no more than 6 inches apart.
Squeeze upper arms against
sides, flex your knees, and
hold the bar chest-high.
Step 2—Without moving
your upper arms, press the
bar down until it touches your
thighs and your arms are fully
extended. Exhale during the
downward movement.
Step 3—Hold the position for
a second.
Step 4—Inhale while
slowly returning bar to the
starting position.
1 2
1
2


ATHLETICS 45
.Choosing an Athletic Activity
Eventually you will want to fine-tune your weight training
program by changing your routine and mixing in free weight
exercises and calisthenics such as crunches, sit-ups, leg raises,
and flutter kicks. Alternate your weight training workouts with
your activity drills and practice sessions. Vary your routine from
time to time so you can maintain your discipline and have fun.
Weight Training Tips
• Check with your doctor and a knowledgeable weight training coach
to set up the right training program for you. Start out slowly and
set realistic goals. Weight machines (rather than free weights and bar-
bells) are usually safest for weightlifters without previous experience.
• Wear the proper clothing and shoes. Your clothing should allow you
free range of movement so that you can use proper weight training
techniques. Tank tops or loose T-shirts and comfortable training pants,
shorts, or sweatpants work well. Wear comfortable shoes that give you
sure footing, the ankle support you need, and adequate cushioning, and
that allow you to feel the floor beneath your feet.
• Always warm up before you work out. Take a brisk walk or easy jog,
jump rope, or pedal a stationary bicycle for 10 minutes or so. Then,
continue your warm-up by lifting weights for one set, but at a very low
effort level.
• Focus on correct technique, including breathing.
• Moderate the speed and control the movement of your repetitions.
Avoid quick, jerky movements, and never rush.
• To prevent injury, gradually increase your workouts by adding more
repetitions instead of adding more weight.
• When increasing your weight load, do so in small increments—from
1 to 3 pounds.
• Listen to your body. If something does not feel right, stop immediately.
Get your health care provider’s approval before resuming your
training program.
• Limit your weight training sessions to about 30 minutes, and remember
to take a break and give your body a rest. Train only two or three
nonconsecutive (never back-to-back) days per week, maximum.
• After every workout, cool down.





ATHLETICS 47
.Athletics for the Fun of It
Athletics for the
Fun of It
People who compete in athletic events do so as amateurs or
professionals. If you want to participate in an athletic activity
while in high school or college, you must be an amateur—
someone who engages in the sport as a pastime rather than as
a profession. Basically, an amateur does not receive money or
any other type of tangible reward for participating in athletics.
An amateur plays strictly for the love of the sport.
Professional athletes also love playing, but they receive
some type of payment or compensation for participating in
the sport.
Colleges and universities consider an athlete a professional
and therefore ineligible to compete if he or she receives pay-
ment for participating in a particular sport; accepts a promise
of payment for participation; signs a contract or written agree-
ment to participate in a professional sport; accepts financial
assistance from a professional sports organization to play a
sport; knowingly competes on a professional sports team; or
enters into an agreement with a sports agent.
High school rules usually differ from state to state,
but the governing bodies of most high schools limit
the type and value of an award a student can receive
when participating in athletics. So, if you plan to
compete in an athletic event apart from a school
activity, check with officials about school and state
rules. By accepting an inappropriate award, you
could be deemed ineligible to participate in your
school’s athletics.


48 ATHLETICS
Athletics for the Fun of It.
However, a college student who was deemed a professional
in one sport but who no longer competes as a professional may
participate in a different sport at the school as an amateur (if all
requirements for that sport are met).
Sportsmanship and You
When participating in athletics, you should practice good
sportsmanship. This includes treating opponents, teammates,
coaches, officials, and spectators with respect. Athletes should
shake hands and congratulate opponents after participating in
an event, whether or not they have won. Good sportsmanship
includes acknowledging great performances by others, and
accepting what might be a poor decision made by an official. It
is not always easy to be a good sport, but good sportsmanship
shows, among other traits, a person’s maturity.
The Olympic Games once featured the world’s best
amateurs. When the modern Games began in 1896,
only amateurs were allowed to compete. However,
the rules changed in 1986 and professionals com-
peted for the first time at the 1988 Olympic Games.
Each Olympic sports group now has the authority to
determine whether professionals can compete in its
particular event. This rule allows some of the world’s
best athletes, many of whom have turned profes-
sional, to compete in the Olympics.
Athletes who
want to maintain
their amateur
status should
uphold high
standards. An
amateur should
have a high sense
of honor and fair
play, and should
be courteous to
opponents,
officials, and
spectators.


ATHLETICS 49
.Athletics for the Fun of It
Not all meets will require officials in every position
listed below. The main thing is to have enough officials
for the size of the event. Plan the events you intend
to hold and then determine which and how many
competition officials should be involved with each
event. Total the number of competition officials and
add in management officials and event management
personnel. For a basic meet or field day like the one
you must plan for requirement 6(a), you will not have
to fill many of the positions, such as photo finish judge
or technical manager.
Everyone involved
in an athletic activity—
participants, coaches, and
parents—should demonstrate
good sportsmanship. When
young athletes see their
mentors behaving as good
sports, then they will under-
stand that winners in sports
and in life act with dignity in
good and bad times. Athletes
who practice good sports-
manship will gain the respect
and appreciation of people in
all aspects of their lives.
There is more to
participating in an athletic
activity than winning. Learning how to be a good sport, how
to play with the proper form, technique, and strategy, and how
to be a team player give amateur athletes a sense of pride in
their accomplishments and a feeling of fun that outlasts any
winning score.
Planning and Organizing a Meet or Field Day
When you attend a sports meet or participate in a field day, you
might not realize how much work and organization is involved.
It takes many people to assure that a meet runs smoothly.


50 ATHLETICS
Athletics for the Fun of It.
The first step is organizing a staff of people to work at the
event. Here are some of the officials—and their duties—at track
and field events:
Meet Director. This person oversees the event and helps
ensure that everything is running smoothly, that all equipment
is available and ready, and that other officials and contestants
are following instructions.
Competition Director. This person checks that all officials
have reported for duty and appoints substitutes when neces-
sary. The competition director has the authority to remove
any official. This person should arrange the event so that only
authorized persons are allowed in the competition area.
Lap Scorers. These officials keep a record of the laps covered
by each competitor in races that have multiple laps. For races of
3 miles and longer (3,000 meters and longer in indoor races),
lap scorers also record each participant’s time for each lap (as
given to them by an official timer).
Clerks of the Course. These officials help maintain the entry
list for the different events and alert the competitors when to
be ready.
When arriving
at a track and
field meet, track
competitors
should report to
the clerk of the
course; field
competitors
should report to
the chief field
judge of their
respective events.


ATHLETICS 51
.Athletics for the Fun of It
Referees. The referees should have a thorough knowledge of
the rules of each event. They resolve any disputes in connec-
tion with the events.
Starter. The starter has complete control of starting all events.
Finish Judges. If a camera device is not used to record the
finish, the finish judges will determine the order of finishers. It
is recommended that there be at least four judges, and normally
one more judge than there are lanes used. When possible,
judges should be placed on the same side of the track, in line
with the finish, and on an elevated platform.
Field Judges. The field judges measure and record the perfor-
mances of the competitors in the field events and determine if
a competitor has committed a foul.
Technical Manager. The technical manager is responsible
for ensuring that the track and field areas and all equipment
comply with the rules.
Timers. Whether the timing is done with electronic timers or
stopwatches, timers should be experienced, focused, and alert.
When fully automatic photo finish equipment is used, timers
act as a backup. A certified official should be designated as
the chief timer. That person should make note of the records
(school, state, national, etc.) for the events to be timed, so an
immediate check can be made to see if there are record-setting
performances. In the event of a record performance, this
person inspects the watches of the timers and certifies on
the official record application form the times recorded by the
timers. Three official timers and one or two alternate timers
should be used.
If a camera device is used to record the event’s finish,
the image must be shown to the photo finish judges,
who will determine the order of finishers.


52 ATHLETICS
Athletics for the Fun of It.
Competition Secretary. The competi-
tion secretary prepares all competitor
lists, start lists, and worksheets for use
by other officials. This person collects the
results of each event and, as soon as pos-
sible, gives them to the meet director. The
competition secretary oversees the scoring
of team competition, combined events,
and handicap races.
Marshal. The marshal has full control
of the course or competition area and
prevents anyone but officials and
competitors from entering or remaining
in the area. This person has a team of assistants and assigns
them their respective duties.
Preparations for a Meet
The event itself needs a lot of planning to ensure its success.
For a simple field day or meet, you might need only a large
grassy field at a local park. Depending on the types of
competitions you are planning, consider the following:
1. Determine the date and hour of the meet. Try not to conflict
with other similar events.
2. Try to select a site that is centrally located for contestants
and has good facilities and accommodations. Good facilities
are important for attracting competitors and spectators. If
necessary, secure the proper permissions and permits for the
event. Your counselor can help you with this.
3. Publicity is important to create interest in and attendance
at your event. Post information in school newsletters,
community newspapers, and, if available, track and field
newsletters or magazines. Place posters (with permission)
at appropriate sites, such as schools, recreation centers,
and so on.
All sports are governed by rules. The average Scout
will not have the opportunity to officiate at large
games or events, but could serve as an official in
connection with an intertroop track and field meet or
sport competition.


ATHLETICS 53
.Athletics for the Fun of It
4. Plan events based on the participants you want to attract.
Are you preparing a field day or track and field events for
teenagers of one gender, or a coed swim meet? Classify
competitors by weight, age, or other suitable criteria. Plan
specific events for each class to attract more competitors
and to be fair.
5. List the events and classifications on the entry forms and
distribute them several weeks in advance so that potential
participants can plan to attend.
6. Secure awards and prizes well in advance of the event.
These could include medals, buttons, or small trophies for
individuals or teams.
7. Set up the grounds at least one day before the event. For
track meets, measure the track with a steel tape and mark
off the various distances, unless the track already has the
markings and has been officially measured. Prepare the
landing pits and runways for the jumping events according
to the requirements of USA Track and Field. Provide the
starter’s pistol and cartridges, jumping standards and sticks,
measuring tapes, scoreboard and public address system, and
other necessities. Check stopwatches for accuracy.
Activities for Fun and Fitness
Here are some fun activities you might want to consider for the
meet or field day you are planning.
Team Water Volleyball. This is a modified volleyball game.
Instead of using a ball, teams will use a water-filled balloon.
Each team has a large towel or sheet and, with cooperative
effort, tries to catch the water balloon in the sheet and throw it
back over the net. This is a great activity on a hot day.
Balloon Race. You will need a chair for each team and balloons
for each teammate. The first person on each team runs to the
chair, sits on the balloon until it pops, then runs back to tag the
next teammate. The first team to pop all its balloons wins.
Obstacle Course. Create an obstacle course with available
resources. The course might involve running around cones;
crawling through tunnels or large boxes; running through a
series of hoops (or making one step in each); and jumping or
climbing over sawhorses or outstretched jump ropes.


54 ATHLETICS
Athletics for the Fun of It.
Chicken Relay. Provide each team member with a tennis ball.
When the relay begins, the first person on each team puts the
tennis ball (like a chicken egg) between his or her knees and
waddles to a box that has been set up a fixed distance away.
The participant must get close enough to the box so that
the ball can be released into the box (like dropping an egg
into a nest). The participant runs back to the team and tags
the next person in line, who then picks up the next “egg”
and waddles off to deposit it in the “nest.” The relay ends
when the last person returns to the team. The first team to
finish is the winning team. (One ball per team could be
used instead of one ball per person. After teammates lay
their “eggs,” they could pick up an egg from the box and
carry it back to the next teammate in line.)
Shoe Box Slide. Provide each team with two shoe boxes. At
the start of the race, the first member of each team puts one
foot into each shoe box, slides his or her way around a cone set
up at a fixed distance, and then slides back to the team. When
that person returns, he or she jumps out of the shoe boxes and
the second teammate puts them on. The relay continues until
the last person returns to his or her team. The first team to
finish is the winner.
Tug-of-War. You will need a rope, preferably about 100 feet
long. Assign as many people to each side as you want, but
be sure the teams are balanced in number and approximate
weight. Determine the center of the rope and wrap tape around
it. Then from the middle, measure 6 feet on each side and
wrap tape at each point. Find a field or yard that is as level as
possible and mark a spot where the center of the rope will be
placed. Members of each team hold their end of the rope, but
the person closest to the center should be behind the tape that
is 6 feet from the center. When a starter gives the “go” com-
mand, both sides tug on the rope until one team has pulled
the rope so that the tape 6 feet from the center has crossed the
field’s center spot. The winning team is the one that wins two
tugs. The teams switch sides after the first pull. If there is a tie
after two pulls, flip a coin to determine which team selects the
side it wants for the third and deciding pull.
In tug-of-war,
participants
cannot wrap the
rope around their
hands or bodies,
and there should
not be any knots
in the rope.


ATHLETICS 55
.Athletics for the Fun of It
Three-Legged Race. Use burlap (potato sacks) or similar
bags. Two-person teams compete. Each member of a team
slips one leg (one team member’s right leg and the other team
member’s left leg) into a bag. The bag is then tied or cinched
at the top so that the legs are “connected.” The team members
can hold each other around the waist to help maintain balance.
The object of the game is for each team to line up and “run” to
a finish line as they try coordinating their leg movements. The
course can vary in length, but should be at least 30 yards. The
first team across the finish line wins. If there are a large number
of teams, the teams could be divided evenly and races could
be run in heats. Winners of each heat could then face off for
the championship.
Team Balloon Race. This is similar to the three-legged race
but does not require a sack. You will need large water-filled
balloons and a field of about 30 yards. Two-person teams
compete. Each team holds a balloon between their heads as
they stand side-by-side. They try to keep the balloon between
their heads as they run to the finish line. The teams start at
the same time and the first team across the finish line with
the balloon between their heads is the winner. If a balloon
is dropped but doesn’t burst, it can be picked up and placed
between the heads again and the team can resume running.
Flying Disc Basketball. You will need a plastic flying disc
and two garbage pails or something similar to use as basket-
ball hoops. The “court” can be indoors or outdoors. Place one
garbage pail at one end of the court and the second at the
other end. Mark off a 20-foot area around each pail. Place the
“hoops” in front of a wall or other structure at each end so that
a throw can be rebounded into the basket. The disc must be
thrown into the garbage pail from at least 20 feet to be scored
as a basket. Each team consists of about five players. The team
that wins a coin toss begins the game by throwing the flying
disc to a teammate from its end of the court. Rather than
dribbling and passing the ball to teammates as in regular
basketball, players can run and pass the flying disc to team-
mates. The defending team members try to intercept the disc.
The first team to score 10 baskets wins.





ATHLETICS 57
.First Aid and Managing Injuries
First Aid and
Managing Injuries
Like anyone else, athletes can get injured or sustain an illness
(such as a heat-related sickness). Proper training and condi-
tioning will help keep you healthy. However, you should know
what to do in the event of common injuries or illnesses.
As a young athlete, to help prevent or reduce the chance
of injuries, you should try to match your physique with your
desired activity. For example, a young athlete with a lean
physique might become involved in track, cross-country, or
swimming. Muscular athletes might consider basketball,
football, or soccer. In weightlifting competitions, for example,
athletes compete against others in their own weight class.
Common Sports Injuries
If you are injured, you should not try to play through the pain.
Ignoring an injury could aggravate it. Treat injuries until they
are healed before you continue participating or training. Young
athletes should be especially careful with injuries because their
bodies are still growing. A neglected or mistreated injury could
cause permanent damage.
Among the common types of injuries and illnesses you
could see or sustain yourself when participating in athletics are
sprains, strains, contusions (bruises), abrasions, blisters, heat
reactions, and concussions. In hot or cold weather, if you don’t
stay properly hydrated, you also might suffer from dehydration.
Some noncontact athletic activities may keep you safer from injury than
others. Among these are cross-country running, track, swimming, golf,
and tennis. Yet, injuries can occur in any of these pursuits as well. Proper
training and conditioning prevent or reduce the chance of injury.
Take responsibility
and precautions
for minimizing
risk and avoiding
injury by following
the information in
the “Ready, Set,
Go” chapter.


58 ATHLETICS
First Aid and Managing Injuries.
A sprain is caused by a twisting, wrenching, or lifting
movement that tears or stretches tissues surrounding a joint. This
can happen when you are walking, running, or jumping, espe-
cially on an uneven surface. You will feel sudden pain.
The area will feel tender to the touch and painful when
moved, so try to keep still. You may experience some swelling
and discoloration.
A strain, or pulled muscle, is an injury to a muscle or ten-
don caused by overstretching, overexertion, heavy lifting, sudden
movement, or a twisting or wrenching action that might happen
when you are weightlifting or playing basketball. A strain may
cause you to feel immediate, intense pain. However, you might
not feel pain until hours after the injury has occurred. There
may be tenderness, swelling, and some discoloration or bruising.
Moving the injured area will be difficult and painful.
To help reduce the pain and swelling, apply an ice pack to
the injured area. To limit mobility, minimize swelling, and to
protect the spot, wrap the area firmly with an elastic bandage
(but not so tightly that circulation is restricted). Rest, and keep
the injured area elevated. After 24 hours, you may use a heat-
ing pad or hot pack for treatment. If you have persistent or
severe pain, seek medical attention.
Contusions, or bruises, are black-and-blue marks caused
by blood leaking into skin tissues. The skin is not broken but
is discolored. Bruises usually are not serious, but they can be,
especially if there are possible fractures or unseen injuries to
internal organs.
Growing youths
are especially
vulnerable to
injuries in the
knees, elbows,
back, shoulders,
and hip areas.
Elevate the sprained or strained area and apply a cold compress
for 15 to 20 minutes. If you have persistent or severe pain, seek
medical attention.


ATHLETICS 59
.First Aid and Managing Injuries
For serious
contusions, seek
immediate
medical attention.
Most bruises can be easily treated. Keep a cold, wet towel
over the bruise for 30 to 60 minutes, and rest the injured area. This
will prevent more blood from leaking into the tissues. To help the
bruise fade, apply a warm, wet cloth to the area the next day.
Abrasions, or scrapes, are caused when skin is rubbed or
scraped off. Abrasions often happen when the skin is scraped
against a hard, unyielding surface such as a basketball court
or running track. The greatest danger with these injuries lies in
contamination and possible infection.
See your health care provider if your tetanus immuni-
zation is not up-to-date.
Treat an abrasion as you would a minor cut. Wash the area
with mild soap and water. Allow the wound to dry, then cover
it with a dry, sterile dressing. If fluid oozes from an
abrasion, gently dab on an antiseptic solution.
Blisters are usually caused by continual rubbing against
the skin. This friction will cause a hot spot, which signals
the beginning of a blister. Blisters on the feet are the most
common and troublesome type. So, be sure that you wear
properly fitting shoes and appropriate socks. If you feel a hot
spot developing, stop immediately and protect the tender area.
If a blister has already formed, protect it from breaking by
adding layers of moleskin.
If a blister must be drained, first wash the foot or other
affected area with mild soap and water. Dry the foot, and
apply an antiseptic solution. Prick the edge of the blister with a
needle that has been sterilized in a flame. Gently press out the
fluid. Reapply antiseptic; cover with a sterile dressing to protect
the area from contamination and further irritation. If a blister
has already broken, treat it like an abrasion.
For blisters, watch for signs of infection—including
tenderness, throbbing, swelling, pus, redness, a red
streak leading from the blister, swollen glands, and
fever. If one or more of these signs develop, seek
medical attention.
Heat reactions include heat exhaustion and heatstroke—
illnesses that can occur when the body becomes overheated.
Heat exhaustion is quite common and less serious than heat-
stroke. However, it is still a serious condition.


60 ATHLETICS
First Aid and Managing Injuries.
A frightened or
anxious victim
might breathe
too heavily or too
deeply, which
can result in
hyperventilation.
Calmly encourage
the person
to relax and
breathe slowly.
Heat exhaustion occurs when the body becomes over-
heated and cannot sufficiently cool itself. The person will
have a body temperature above 98.6 but below 102 degrees,
pale and clammy skin, heavy sweating, dizziness and fainting,
pronounced weakness, nausea and tiredness, headache, and
muscle cramps.
Have the person lie down in a shady, cool spot with feet
raised. Loosen clothing and cool him or her with cool, wet
cloths or a fan. Have the person sip water. Recovery should be
rapid, but if symptoms persist, seek medical attention.
Stay Hydrated
Dehydration, caused by a lack of water in the body,
can occur in cold weather as well as hot weather. The
first signs will usually be dark-colored urine, thirst,
dry lips, and a slightly dry mouth. Signs of moder-
ate dehydration include a very dry mouth, sunken
eyes, and pale skin. Signs of progressed dehydration
include fatigue, headache, body aches, a rapid but
weak pulse, rapid and short breathing, cold hands and
feet, and confusion. Left untreated, severe dehydra-
tion can lead to shock and death.
If you are mildly dehydrated, drink plenty of
water. See a health care provider if you are moderate-
ly dehydrated. Severe dehydration requires immediate
medical attention and hospitalization because you
must be pumped with intravenous fluids right away.
In hot or cold weather, drink plenty of water to
avoid dehydration. Don’t wait until you feel thirsty—
that is an indication that you are already becoming
mildly dehydrated.
Heatstroke, sometimes called sunstroke, is very serious.
It occurs when extremely high temperatures overwhelm the
body’s cooling mechanisms, which become so overworked that
they simply stop working. As a result, the person’s temperature
shoots upward and becomes life-threatening. The victim will
have a temperature of 102 degrees or higher (usually higher than
105 degrees); red, hot, and dry skin; and an extremely rapid
pulse. Other signs include confusion or disorientation, fainting
or unconsciousness, and convulsions.


ATHLETICS 61
.First Aid and Managing Injuries
Move the person to a shaded spot, face up with head
and shoulders raised. Remove the victim’s outer clothing and
sponge the bare skin with cold water. You should also soak the
underclothing with cool water; drape the bare skin with wet
cloths; apply cold packs; use a fan or air-conditioning; and, if
possible, place the victim in a tub of cool (not ice-cold) water.
Use combinations of all available treatments. Once the body
temperature drops to a safe level (101 degrees), dry the skin.
When the victim is able to drink, provide all the water that is
wanted. Treat for shock and obtain medical help immediately.
Beat the Heat
Wear appropriate clothing to help keep cool when
training or competing in the heat, including light-
colored clothing and a hat. Acclimate to the heat by
training for short periods of time to begin with and
gradually increasing the time each day. Avoid partici-
pating in an athletic endeavor in high temperature and
high humidity. Try to plan your strenuous activities
for the cooler hours in the morning or evening. Drink
plenty of water and sports drinks. Sports drinks help
replenish nutrients—such as salt—that are lost when
sweating. However, most sports drinks are also high in
sugar, so you should drink an equal amount of water.
If you have a 12-ounce sports drink, be sure to carry 12
ounces of water and alternate between them.
Careful With Concussions
A concussion is a brain injury caused by a blow to the head or a
sudden change in motion to the head, in which the brain bounces back
and forth inside the skull. A person does not need to be knocked out
to have a concussion. Some symptoms of a concussion are: difficulty
to think clearly, difficulty concentrating, headache, dazed appearance,
behavior or personality change, lack of balance, disorientation, slurred
speech, nausea, sensitivity to light or noise, and sleepiness. Symptoms
may occur right away or take some time to develop. Someone with
a suspected concussion should be assessed promptly by a medical
professional, and monitored regularly while recovering. The primary
treatment for a concussion is brain rest.
More information
about treating
injuries and
heat-related
illnesses can be
found in the
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet.


62 ATHLETICS
Athletics Resources.
Athletics Resources
Scouting Literature
Deck of First Aid; Emergency First
Aid pocket guide; Backpacking,
Canoeing, Climbing, Cooking, Cycling,
First Aid, Fishing, Fly-Fishing, Golf,
Hiking, Horsemanship, Kayaking,
Personal Fitness, Rowing, Skating,
Small-Boat Sailing, Snow Sports,
Sports, Swimming, Water Sports, and
Whitewater merit badge pamphlets.
Books
American College of Sports Medicine.
ACSM Fitness Book, 3rd ed. Human
Kinetics Publishers, 2003.
American Red Cross. First Aid/CPR/
AED Participant’s Manual, 2nd ed.
American Red Cross, 2016.
Bompa, Tudor, and Carrera, Michael.
Conditioning Young Athletes. Human
Kinetics Publishers, 2015.
Carr, Gerry. Fundamentals of Track
and Field, 2nd ed. Human Kinetics
Publishers, 1999.
Dawes, Jay. Developing Agility and
Quickness, 2nd ed. Human Kinetics
Publishers, 2019.
Dintiman, George Blough. Speed
Improvement for Young Athletes: How
to Sprint Faster in Your Sport in 30
Workouts, 2nd ed. National Association
of Speed and Explosion, 2006.
Ellis, Joseph, D.P.M. Running Injury-
Free, 2nd ed. Rodale Books, 2013.
Fortin, Francois, ed. Sports: The
Complete Visual Reference.
Firefly Books Ltd., 2003.
Greene, Larry, and Pate, Russ. Training
for Young Distance Runners, 3rd ed.
Human Kinetics Publishers, 2014.
Jackson, Colin. Young Track and
Field Athlete. Dorling Kindersley
Publishing, 1996.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ATHLETICS 63
.Athletics Resources
Organizations and Websites
Amateur Athletic Union
National Headquarters
P.O. Box 22409
Lake Buena Vista, FL 32830
Telephone: 407-934-7200
aausports.org
American Academy of Physical
Medicine and Rehabilitation
9700 W. Bryn Mawr Ave., Suite 200
Rosemont, IL 60018
Telephone: 847-737-6000
aapmr.org
American College of
Sports Medicine
401 W. Michigan St.
Indianapolis, IN 46202
Telephone: 317-637-9200
acsm.org
Mayo Clinic
200 First St. SW
Rochester, MN 55905
Telephone: 507-284-2511
mayoclinic.com
National Strength and
Conditioning Association
1885 Bob Johnson Drive
Colorado Springs, CO 80906
Toll-free telephone: 800-815-6826
nsca.com
President’s Council on Sports,
Fitness & Nutrition
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite 560
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 240-276-9567
fitness.gov
SHAPE America (Society of Health
and Physical Educators)
1900 Association Drive
Reston, VA 20191
Toll-free telephone: 800-213-7193
shapeamerica.org
USA Track & Field
132 E. Washington St., Suite 800
Indianapolis, IN 46204
Telephone: 317-261-0500
usatf.org
U.S. Olympic Training Center
National Headquarters
One Olympic Plaza
Colorado Springs, CO 80909
Telephone: 719-632-5551
teamusa.org
Youth Sports Safety Alliance
Telephone: 214-637-6282
youthsportssafetyalliance.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to personal
trainer John Taylor and to Warren
Franke, professor in the Department of
Kinesiology at Iowa State University, for
their expertise in reviewing the revised
edition of the Athletics merit badge
pamphlet.
Scouting America thanks personal
trainers John Charles and Jeremy
Duke of Womack’s Personal Training
Gym, Keller, Texas, for their expertise
and assistance during production of
the previous edition of this pamphlet.
Scouting America also thanks the
management and staff of Womack’s for
the use of its facility for a photo shoot.
Scouting America appreciates the
assistance and expertise of Tracy Boone
of Better Bodies,


64 ATHLETICS
Athletics Resources.
Denver, Colorado, and personal trainer
Rose Bily of Dallas, Texas, in reviewing
the previous edition.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 36
(muscle chart)
All photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—page 4
Brian Payne—pages 8, 29, 32 (baseball
throw), 33–34 (all), and 48–49