COMMUNICATION


COMMUNICATION
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


76
Communication
1. Do ONE of the following:
(a) For one day, keep a log in which you describe your communication
activities. Keep track of the time and different ways you spend communicating,
such as talking person-to-person, listening to teachers, listening to the radio or
podcasts, watching television, using social media, reading books and other
print media, and using any electronic communication device. Discuss with
your counselor what your log reveals about the importance of communication
in your life. Think of ways to improve your communication skills.
(b) For three days, keep a journal of your listening experiences. Identify one
example of each of the following, and discuss with your counselor when you
have listened to:
(1) Obtain information
(2) Be persuaded
(3) Appreciate or enjoy something
(4) Understand someone’s feelings
(c) In a small-group setting, meet with other Scouts or with friends. Have
them share personal stories about significant events in their lives that affected
them in some way. Take note of how each Scout participates in the group
discussion and how effectively each Scout communicates their story. Report
what you have learned to your counselor about the differences you observed
in effective communication.
(d) List as many ways as you can think of to communicate with others
(face-to-face, by telephone, letter, email, text messages, social media, and so on).
For each type of communication, discuss with your counselor an instance
when that method might not be appropriate or effective.


77
2. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Think of a creative way to describe yourself using, for example, a collage,
short story or autobiography, drawing or series of photographs, or a song or skit.
Using the aid you created, make a presentation to your counselor about yourself.
(b) Choose a concept, product, or service in which you have great confidence.
Build a sales plan based on its good points. Try to persuade the counselor to
agree with, use, or buy your concept, product, or service. After your sales talk,
discuss with your counselor how persuasive you were.
3. Write a five-minute speech. Give it at a meeting of a group.
4. Interview someone you know fairly well, like, or respect because of his or her
position, talent, career, or life experiences. Listen actively to learn as much as
you can about the person. Then prepare and deliver to your counselor an
introduction of the person as though this person were to be a guest speaker,
and include reasons why the audience would want to hear this person speak.
Show how you would call to invite this person to speak.
5. Attend a public meeting (city council, school board, debate) approved by your
counselor where several points of view are given on a single issue. Practice
active listening skills and take careful notes of each point of view. Prepare an
objective report that includes all points of view that were expressed, and share
this with your counselor.
6. With your counselor’s approval, develop a plan to teach a skill or inform
someone about something. Prepare teaching aids for your plan. Carry out your
plan. With your counselor, determine whether the person has learned what
you intended.
7. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Write to the editor of a magazine or your local newspaper to express your
opinion or share information on any subject you choose. Send your message
by fax, email, or regular mail.
(b) Create a webpage or blog of special interest to you (for instance, your
troop or crew, a hobby, or a sport). Include at least three articles or entries
and one photograph or illustration, and one link to some other webpage or
blog that would be helpful to someone who visits the webpage or blog you
have created. It is not necessary to post your webpage or blog to the internet,
but if you decide to do so, you must first share it with your parents and
counselor and get their permission.
(c) Use desktop publishing to produce a newsletter, brochure, flier, or other
printed material for your troop or crew, class at school, or other group.
Include at least one article and one photograph or illustration.
8. Plan a troop or crew court of honor, campfire program, or interfaith worship
service. Have the patrol leaders’ council approve it, then write the script and
prepare the program. Serve as master of ceremonies.
9. Find out about three career opportunities in communication. Pick one and
find out the education, training, and experience required for this profession.
Discuss this with your counselor, and explain why this profession might
interest you.


COMMUNICATION 77
.Resources in Communication
Scouting Literature
Cinematography, Journalism,
Photography, Public Speaking, Radio,
and Theater merit badge pamphlets
Books
Alba, Jason. I’m on Facebook—
Now What??? How to Get Personal,
Business, and Professional Value
from Facebook. Happy About, 2008.
Banks, Michael A. Blogging Heroes:
Interviews With 30 of the World’s
Top Bloggers. Wiley, 2007.
Briggs, Nadine. How to Make and Keep
Friends: Tips for Kids to Overcome
50 Common Social Challenges.
CreateSpace Independent Publishing
Platform, 2010.
Dowis, Richard. The Lost Art of the
Great Speech: How to Write One—
How to Deliver It. Amacom, 1999.
Gardner, Susannah. Blogging for
Dummies. For Dummies, 2012.
Hounshell, Liz, and Erika Karres. 101
Do’s and Don’ts and Double Don’ts
on Texting. YouthLight Inc, 2010.
Jones, Bob. Oratory, 2nd ed. CDE, 2002.
Lamb, Sandra E. How to Write It:
A Complete Guide to Everything
You’ll Ever Write, 3rd ed. Ten Speed
Press, 2011.
Mierau, Christiana. Accept No
Substitutes! The History
of American Advertising.
Lerner, 2000.
Otfinoski, Steven. Speaking Up,
Speaking Out: A Kid’s Guide
to Making Speeches, Oral Reports
and Conversation. Millbrook
Press, 1997.
Pease, Allan, and Barbara Pease.
The Definitive Book of Body
Language. Bantam, 2006.
Smith, Bud E. Creating Web Pages
for Dummies, 8th ed.
For Dummies, 2008.
Strunk Jr., William. The Elements
of Style, Tribeca Books, 2011.
Resources in Communication
For more information about
Scouting-related resources,
visit the BSA’s official online
retail catalog (with your
parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org.


78 COMMUNICATION
Resources in Communication.
Organizations and Websites
Animation Factory
Website:
http://www.animationfactory.com
Association for Education in
Journalism and Mass Communication
Website: http://www.aejmc.org
Broadcast Education Association
Website: http://www.beaweb.org
Freedom Forum First
Amendment Center
Website:
http://www.firstamendmentcenter.org
National Communication Association
Website: http://www.natcom.org
Public Relations Society of America
Website: http://www.prsa.org
Toastmasters International
Website: http://www.toastmasters.org
Webmonkey
Website: http://www.webmonkey.com
Acknowledgments
Thanks to the author, Scott S. Stuckey,
who is a senior editor at the National
Geographic Society. Mr. Stuckey is the
former editor of Boys’ Life magazine.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Shutterstock.com—cover (video
camera, ©keella/Shutterstock;
smartphones, ©Rashevskyi
Viacheslav/Shutterstock; man in
suit, ©Africa Studio/Shutterstock),
cover and page 3 (microphone,
©Sergii Korolko/Shutterstock), cover
and page 32 (notebook with pen,
©Thep Urai/Shutterstock); pages 5
(©BlueSkyImage/Shutterstock),
6 (©Kesu/Shutterstock),
7 (©altafulla/Shutterstock), 8 (maple
leaf, ©Stefanina Hill/Shutterstock;
men’s room sign, ©Robert J. Beyers
II/Shutterstock), 8 and 9 (hand,
©Hakan Kiziltan/Shutterstock),
10 (sign language, ©Givaga/
Shutterstock; keyboard,
©enciktepstudio/Shutterstock),
12 (©leungchopan/Shutterstock),
14 (©TheFinalMiracle/Shutterstock),
16 (©Kuzma/Shutterstock),
18 (©Robert Kneschke/Shutterstock),
21 (©Viorel Sima/Shutterstock),
30 (©Alan Bailey/Shuterstock),
35 (©Khakimullin Aleksandr/
Shutterstock); 40, 51, and 55
(©Monkey Business Images/
Shutterstock); 44 (©Dan Howell/
Shutterstock), 46 (©sritangphoto/
Shutterstock), 47 (©lightpoet/
Shutterstock), 71 (©Goodluz/
Shutterstock), 73 (reporters,
©Picsfive/Shutterstock; cameraman,
©Ruta Production/Shutterstock),
74 (©Konstantin Chagin/
Shutterstock), 75 (©Denis
Rozhnovsky/Shutterstock),
and 76 (©TatjanaRittner/
Shutterstock)