STEM-Based
WELDING


WELDING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


4 WELDING
Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the hazards you are most
likely to encounter while welding, and what you
should do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, or
lessen these hazards.
b. Show that you know first aid for, and the prevention
of, injuries or illnesses that could occur while welding,
including electrical shock, eye injuries, burns, fume
inhalation, dizziness, skin irritation, and exposure
to hazardous chemicals, including filler metals and
welding gases.
2. Do the following:
a. With your counselor, discuss general safety precautions
and Safety Data Sheets related to welding. Explain the
importance of the SDS.
b. Describe the appropriate safety gear and clothing that
must be worn when welding. Then, present yourself
properly dressed for welding—in protective equipment,
clothing, and footwear.
c. Explain and demonstrate the proper care and storage
of welding equipment, tools, and protective clothing
and footwear.
3. Explain the terms welding, electrode, slag, and oxidation.
Describe the welding process, how heat is generated, what
kind of filler metal is added (if any), and what protects the
molten metal from the atmosphere.
4. Name the different mechanical and thermal cutting methods.
Choose one method and describe how to use the process.
Discuss one advantage and one limitation of this process.
5. Do the following:
a. Select two welding processes, and make a list of the
different components of the equipment required
for each process. Discuss one advantage and one
limitation for each process.


WELDING 5
b. Choose one welding process. Set up the process you
have chosen, including gas regulators, work clamps,
cables, filler materials, and equipment settings. Have
your counselor inspect and approve the area for the
welding process you have chosen.
6. After successfully completing requirements 1 through 5,
use the equipment you prepared for the welding process
in 5b to do the following:
a. Using a metal scribe or soapstone, sketch your initial
onto a metal plate, and weld a bead on the plate
following the pattern of your initial.
b. Cover a small plate (approximately 3" x 3" x ¼") with
weld beads side by side.
c. Tack two plates together in a square groove butt joint.
d. Weld the two plates together from 6c on both sides.
e. Tack two plates together in a T joint, have your
counselor inspect it, then weld a T joint with fillet
weld on both sides.
f. Tack two plates together in a lap joint, have your
counselor inspect it, then weld a lap joint with fillet
weld on both sides.
7. Do the following:
a. Find out about three career opportunities in the welding
industry. Pick one and find out the education, training,
and experience required for this profession. Discuss this
with your counselor, and explain why the profession
might interest you.
b. Discuss the role of the American Welding Society in
the welding profession.


WELDING 87
.Welding Resources
Welding Resources
The resources listed below represent only a fraction of available welding information.
Check your local library, bookstores, and the Internet for additional titles, including
older or out-of-print books. Most welding techniques are timeless.
Scouting Resources
Drafting, Electronics, Engineering, First
Aid, Inventing, Metalwork, Robotics,
and Safety merit badge pamphlets
Books
American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) Accredited Standards
Committee Z49. Safety in Welding,
Cutting, and Allied Processes. ANSI
Z49.1:2012. American Welding
Society, 2012.
American Welding Society. Welding
Handbook, Vol. 1, 9th ed. American
Welding Society, 2001.
———. Welding Handbook, Vol. 2, 9th ed.
American Welding Society, 2004.
———. Welding Handbook, Vol. 3, 9th ed.
American Welding Society, 2007.
Geary, Don, and Rex Miller. Welding,
2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Minnick, William H. Gas Tungsten Arc
Welding Handbook, 5th ed.
Goodheart-Willcox Company, 2005.
O’Brien, Robert L. Jefferson’s Welding
Encyclopedia, 18th ed. American
Welding Society, 1997.
Organizations and Websites
American Welding Society
Website: www.aws.org
ESAB Education Resources
Website: www.esabna.com/us/en/
education/index.cfm
Hobart Institute of Welding
Technology
Website: www.welding.org
James F. Lincoln Arc Welding
Foundation
Website: www.jflf.org
Lincoln Electric Company
Website: www.lincolnelectric.com
Miller Electric Manufacturing
Company
Website: www.millerwelds.com/
resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at www.
scoutstuff.org for a complete list
of all merit badge pamphlets
and other Scouting materials
and supplies.