EXPLOR ATION

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

EXPLOR ATION

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. General Knowledge. Do the following:
a. Define exploration and explain how it differs from
adventure travel, trekking or hiking, tour-group trips,
or recreational outdoor adventure trips.
b. Explain how approaches to exploration may differ if it
occurs in the ocean, in space, in a jungle, or in a science
lab in a city.
2. History of Exploration. Discuss with your counselor the
history of exploration. Select a field of study with a history
of exploration to illustrate the importance of exploration in
the development of that field (for example, aerospace, oil
industry, paleontology, oceanography, etc.).
3. Importance of Exploration. Explain to your counselor why
it is important to explore. Discuss the following:
a. Why it is important for exploration to have a
scientific basis
b. How explorers have aided in our understanding of
our world
c. What you think it takes to be an explorer
4. Real-Life Exploration. Do ONE of the following:
a. Learn about a living explorer. Create a short report or
presentation (verbal, written, or multimedia slide presentation) on this individual’s objectives and the achievements
of one of the explorer’s expeditions. Share what you have
learned with your counselor and unit.
b. Learn about an actual scientific exploration expedition.
Gather information about the mission objectives and the
expedition’s most interesting or important discoveries.
Share what you have learned with your counselor and
unit. Tell how the information gained from this expedition
helped scientists answer important questions.
4    EXPLORATION

c. Learn about types of exploration that may take place in a
laboratory or scientific research facility (medicine, biology,
chemistry, physics, astronomy, etc.). Explain to your
counselor how laboratory research and exploration are
similar to field research and exploration.

5. Exploration in Lab and Field. Do ONE of the following,
and share what you learn with your counselor:
a. With your parent’s permission and counselor’s approval,
visit either in person or via the internet an exploration
sponsoring organization (such as The Explorers Club,
National Geographic Society, Smithsonian Institution, Alpine
Club, World Wildlife Fund, or similar organization). Find
out what type(s) of exploration the organization supports.
b. With permission and approval, visit either in person or
via the internet a science lab, astronomical observatory,
medical research facility, or similar site. Learn what
exploration is done in this facility.
As you work on the Exploration merit badge, remember to always use
the buddy system. Whether you are out in the field or meeting with your
merit badge counselor, having a buddy will help ensure everyone’s safety.
You and your buddy can watch out for each other wherever you may be or
whatever you may be doing.
EXPLORATION    5

6. Expedition Planning. Discuss with your counselor each of
the following steps for conducting a successful exploration
activity. Explain the need for each step.
a. Identify the objectives (establish goals).
b. Plan the mission. Create an expedition agenda or
schedule. List potential documents or permits needed.
c. Budget and plan for adequate financial resources. Estimate
costs for travel, equipment, accommodations, meals,
permits or licenses, and other expedition expenses.
d. Determine equipment and supplies required for personal
and mission needs for the length of the expedition.
e. Determine communication and transportation needs. Plan
how to keep in contact with your base or the outside
world, and determine how you will communicate with
each other on-site.
f. Establish safety and first aid procedures (including planning for medical evacuation). Identify the hazards that
explorers could encounter on the expedition, and establish
procedures to prevent or avoid those hazards.
g. Determine team selection. Identify who is essential
for the expedition to be successful and what skills are
required by the expedition leader.
h. Establish detailed recordkeeping (documentation) procedures. Plan the interpretation and sharing of information
at the conclusion of the expedition.
7. Prepare for an Expedition. With your parent’s permission
and counselor’s approval, prepare for an actual expedition to
an area you have not previously explored; the place may be
nearby or far away. Do the following:
a. Make your preparations under the supervision of a
trained expedition leader, expedition planner, or other
qualified adult experienced in exploration (such as a
school science teacher, museum representative, or
qualified instructor).
b. Use the steps listed in requirement 6 to guide your
preparations. List the items of equipment and supplies
you will need. Discuss with your counselor why you
chose each item and how it will be of value on the
expedition. Determine who should go on the expedition.
6    EXPLORATION

c. Conduct a pre-expedition check, covering the steps in
requirement 6, and share the results with your counselor.
With your counselor, walk through the Sweet Sixteen of
BSA Safety for your expedition. Ensure that all foreseeable
hazards for your expedition are adequately addressed.
Expeditions are widely variable. You do not have to climb
Mount Everest or go to a jungle to be an explorer. For this
merit badge, an expedition should be viewed like a field
trip or science project. While you cannot just hike some
place and call it an expedition, you can hike to a location
and study an aspect that interests you.
The major difference between an expedition and
a field science trip is that you (with your counselor’s
guidance) have to plan everything. You have to formulate
objectives and plan an agenda. As needed, you will
need to do things like confirm transportation, arrange
communication, plan for food and medical supplies,
acquire all food and other supplies, construct safety and
possible evacuation procedures, manage any adverse
events, and prepare a report after the expedition.
Evaluating the effects of a storm on the local forest or
nature preserve, the effects of a drought on a field used
by birds and mammals, changes in butterfly populations
due to loss of wildflower habitat, incursions by invasive
plant or animal species, insect diversity, and presence
or absence of amphibians or fish are just some of the
examples that can be studied and reported. Your imagination is your only limitation.
8. Go on an Expedition. Complete the following:
a. With your parent’s permission and under the supervision
of your merit badge counselor or a counselor-approved
qualified person, use the planning steps you learned
in requirement 6 and the preparations you completed
in requirement 7 to personally undertake an actual
expedition to an area you have not previously explored.
b. Discuss with your counselor what is outdoor ethics and its
role in exploration and enjoying the outdoors responsibly.
EXPLORATION    7

c. After you return, compile a report on the results of your
expedition and how you accomplished your objective(s).
Include a statement of the objectives, note your findings
and observations, include photos, note any discoveries,
report any problems or adverse events, and have a
conclusion (whether you reached your objective or not).
The post-expedition report must be at least one page
and no more than three; one page can be photos, graphs,
or figures.
9. Career Opportunities. Identify three career opportunities in
exploration. Pick one and explain to your counselor how to
prepare for such a career. Discuss what education and training are required, and why this profession might interest you.

Eagle Scout Alex Houston joined this 2014 expedition in Antarctica as part of the
National Eagle Scout Association’s World Explorer program.

8    EXPLORATION

EXPLORATION RESOURCES.

Exploration Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook;
Archaeology, Astronomy, Aviation, Bird
Study, Chemistry, Environmental Science,
First Aid, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Forestry, Geology, Insect Study, Inventing,
Mammal Study, Medicine, Mining in
Society, Nature, Nuclear Science, Oceanography, Photography, Plant Science, Reptile
and Amphibian Study, Robotics, Scuba
Diving, Signs, Signals, and Codes, Soil and
Water Conservation, Space Exploration,
Veterinary Medicine, Weather, and
Wilderness Survival merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with your
parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
Aronson, Marc, and John W. Glenn.
The World Made New: Why the Age
of Exploration Happened and How
It Changed the World. National
Geographic Children’s Books, 2007.

76    EXPLORATION

Ballard, Robert D., and Rick Archbold.
The Lost Ships of Robert Ballard: An
Unforgettable Underwater Tour by the
World’s Leading Deep-Sea Explorer.
Thunder Bay Press, 2005.
Dickmann, Nancy. Exploring Beyond the
Solar System. Rosen Central, 2015.
Douglas, Ed. Mountaineers: Great Tales
of Bravery and Conquest. DK
Publishing, 2011.
Hanbury-Tenison, Robin. The Great
Explorers. Thames & Hudson, 2010.
———. The Modern Explorers. Thames &
Hudson, 2013.
———. The Seventy Great Journeys in
History. Thames & Hudson, 2006.
Knauer, Kelly. Great Discoveries:
Explorations That Changed History.
Time, 2009.
Lansing, Alfred. Endurance: Shackleton’s
Incredible Voyage. Basic Books, 2014.
MacLeod, Alasdair. Explorers: Great Tales
of Adventure and Endurance. DK
Publishing, 2010.
Manyak, Michael J., M.D., Joyce J.
Johnson, D.O., and Warren J. Young.
Lizard Bites & Street Riots. WindRush
Publishers, 2014.

.EXPLORATION RESOURCES

Matthews, Rupert. DK Eyewitness Books:
Explorer. DK Publishing, 2012.
Miller, Ron. Curiosity’s Mission on Mars:
Exploring the Red Planet. 21st
Century, 2014.
Porti, Andrea. Explorers: The Most
Exciting Voyages of Discovery—From
the African Expeditions to the Lunar
Landing. Firefly Books, 2011.
Ross, Stewart. Into the Unknown: How
Great Explorers Found Their Way by
Land, Sea, and Air. Candlewick, 2014.

Multimedia
Alien Deep with Bob Ballard (DVD).
National Geographic, 2012.
Burns, Ken. Lewis & Clark: The Journey
of the Corps of Discovery (DVD).
PBS, 1997.
NASA Videos (various topics),
http://www.nasa.gov/multimedia/
videogallery/
National Geographic Live! The Explorers:
Paul Sereno & Phillip Manning
(DVD), National Geographic, 2008.
Nautilus Live (live streaming).
Ocean Exploration Trust,
http://www.nautiluslive.org
NOVA: The Vikings (DVD). PBS, 2006.
The Polar Explorer (DVD). PBS Home
Video, 2012.

Organizations and Websites
American Alpine Club
710 10th St., Suite 100
Golden, CO 80401
Telephone: 303-384-0110
Website:
http://www.americanalpineclub.org

American Museum of Natural History
Central Park West at 79th Street
New York, NY 10024-5192
Toll-free telephone: 800-462-8687
Website: http://www.amnh.org
The Explorers Club
46 E. 70th Street
New York, NY 10021
Telephone: 212-628-8383
Website: http://explorers.org
National Aeronautics and
Space Administration
NASA Headquarters
300 E. Street SW, Suite 5R30
Washington, DC 20546
Telephone: 202-358-0001
Website: http://www.nasa.gov
National Eagle Scout
Association (NESA)
Boy Scouts of America
1325 West Walnut Hill Lane
P.O. Box 152079
Irving, TX 75015-2079
Telephone: 972-580-2000
Website: http://www.nesa.org
Visit the NESA website to learn
more about its exciting World
Explorers Program for Eagle Scouts.
National Geographic Society
1145 17th Street NW
Washington, DC 20036-4688
Toll-free telephone: 800-647-5463
Website:
http://www.nationalgeographic.com/
explorers

EXPLORATION    77

EXPLORATION RESOURCES.

National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
1401 Constitution Avenue, NW
Room 5128
Washington, DC 20230
Telephone: 301-713-1208
Website: http://www.noaa.gov
National Science Foundation
4201 Wilson Blvd.
Arlington, VA 22230
Telephone: 703-292-5111
Website: http://www.nsf.gov
Smithsonian Institution
P.O. Box 37012
SI Building, Room 153, MRC 010
Washington, DC 20013-7012
Telephone: 202-633-1000
Website: http://www.si.edu
World Wildlife Fund
P.O. Box 97180
Washington, DC 20090-7180
Telephone: 202-293-4800
Website: http://www.worldwildlife.org

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is extremely
grateful to the following individuals who
helped develop the Exploration merit
badge and pamphlet, and for providing
many of the photos herein. We appreciate
their time, expertise, and involvement
very much.
Expedition medicine: Michael J. Manyak,
M.D., Exploration merit badge lead;
Distinguished Eagle Scout and vice president, National Eagle Scout Association;
chief medical advisor to Accenture PLC
and Global Rescue LLC; National
Geographic consultant for medicine;
Sweeney Medalist, The Explorers Club;
coauthor, Lizard Bites & Street Riots
78    EXPLORATION

Paleoanthropology: Lee R. Berger,
Ph.D., Exploration merit badge codeveloper; Distinguished Eagle Scout;
professor and director, Institute for
Human Evolution, University of the
Witwatersrand, Johannesburg, South
Africa; National Geographic Explorer-inResidence; Fellow, The Explorers Club
Aerial forensics: Harry Brooks, attorney
and aircraft accident investigator; former
U.S. Marine fighter pilot; Fellow, The
Explorers Club
Aerospace: Scott Parazynski, M.D.,
Distinguished Eagle Scout; astronaut
with seven space shuttle flights and
five space walks, and the only astronaut
who has both flown in space and
summited Mount Everest; Fellow,
The Explorers Club
Anthropology: Andrew Harvey, Ph.D.,
linguist, The George Washington
University; Fellow, The Explorers Club;
William Thomas, Ph.D., director, New
Jersey School of Conservation; noted for
ethno-ecology, conservation, and traditional ecological wisdom of indigenous
peoples; Lowell Thomas Awardee and
Fellow, The Explorers Club
Archaeology: Kathryn Ranhorn, Ph.D.,
Paleolithic archaeologist, The George
Washington University; Fellow, The
Explorers Club
Dive medicine: R. Craig Cook, M.D.,
dive medicine specialist and explorer,
specializing in pristine seas; medical
director, Sport Diver magazine
Diving technology: D. Karin Lynn,
captain, Civil Engineer Corps, U.S. Navy
(retired); trustee and member, Women
Divers Hall of Fame; Fellow, The
Explorers Club

