HIKING


HIKING
scouting AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Hiking or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35907
ISBN 978-0-8395-3407-8
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024b Printing
FPO


HIKING 3


Contents
Hiking Now and Then . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Get Ready! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Get Set! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Go! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Minimizing Risk . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Hiking Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61


HIKING 5
.Hiking Now and Then
Hiking Now and Then
Have you ever wanted to roam all day through forests and
fields, climb a high hill, and look far across the land? Maybe
you want to explore busy city streets, dusty farm roads,
and beaches. Perhaps you are eager to see what’s around
the next corner and beyond the distant horizon. If so, then
hiking is for you.
Hiking is also a terrific way to keep your body and mind in
top shape, both now and for a lifetime. Walking packs power
into your legs and makes your heart and lungs healthy and
strong. Exploring the outdoors challenges you with discoveries
and new ideas. Your senses will improve as you use your eyes
and ears to gather information along the way.
Hiking with others
builds friendships.
Sharing good
times together
and watching
out for one
another deepens
your bonds with
other people.
Hiking gives you the freedom to travel under your own power to
the places you most want to go.


6 HIKING
Lastly, hiking brings you closer to the earth. As the miles
roll beneath your feet, you will sense the lay of the land—hills
tumbling into valleys, prairies flowing toward the mountains,
rivers bending the shapes of cities and towns. Earning the
Hiking merit badge will prepare you for exciting journeys.
Hikes of 10 and 20 miles will give you the experience and
confidence to enjoy hiking as a lifetime hobby.
A Short History of Hiking
Hiking has always been a part of the human experience.
When the first settlers arrived in North America, they were
on foot, probably walking across the Bering land mass or on
floes of ice from Asia to what is now Alaska. Their descendants
made their way to every corner of the continent, one footstep
at a time. They knew that going on foot would be the only way
that many of them could get from place to place. They went
far and wide, sometimes crossing large portions of what would
become the United States.
By the 1800s, railroads,
ships, and stagecoach lines
began to offer Americans
ways to travel with little
physical effort. Even though
hiking was no longer a
necessity, many people
chose to keep walking
anyway. Some wanted
the exercise and fresh air.
Others enjoyed the leisurely
pace or the scenery. Many
found hiking relaxing.
Your pace allows you to see the plants and animals, like these
ladybird beetles, that are important parts of every environment.
Hiking the Pacific Northwest, 1906
Hiking Now and Then.


HIKING 7
.Hiking Now and Then
Hiking on Mount Rainier, Washington, 1906
Climbing the Sunset Trail near Asheville, North Carolina, 1912


8 HIKING
Hiking Now and Then.
Hiking for fun took off in a big way in the late 1800s and
early 1900s. Hiking clubs encouraged people to get out and
walk. Long-distance hikers made their way from the Atlantic
Ocean to the Pacific Ocean. Construction of the Appalachian
Trail, the Pacific Crest Trail, the Continental Divide Trail, and
hundreds of other routes provided the public with pathways to
walk on for a day, for a week, or even for months at a time.
Lord Baden-Powell, the
founder of world Scouting,
was a great supporter of
exploring the outdoors on a
hike, as evidenced by some of
his sketches.


HIKING 9
.Hiking Now and Then
Over the years the requirements for the Hiking merit badge have changed less than
those for any other Scouting award.
While hiking clothing and gear have changed with the
times, what has not changed is the joy of hiking. It is still as
simple as lacing up your shoes and taking off under your own
power. Since Scouting America began in 1910, Scouts have
known the freedom and rewards of setting out along a trail,
down a quiet country road, or across a bustling urban land-
scape. Now it is your turn to do that, too.





HIKING 11
.Get Ready!
Get Ready!
The adventure of hiking awaits you. All you have to do is take
the first step.
Kinds of Hiking
Where do you want to go? What do you want to see? Hiking
opportunities are all around you—in cities, on backroads,
across deserts and tundra, on trails, and where there are no
pathways at all. Each kind of hiking has its own challenges
and delights.


Get Ready!.
Urban Hiking
Of all Scouting adventures, city hikes can be among the most
interesting and easiest to plan. Set a course that will take
you through parts of town you would like to see, or to a
zoo, an exhibit, a museum, or a historical site. There may
be a fair, a cultural celebration, or another civic activity
you can attend. Many metropolitan areas have parks,
arboretums, hiking trails, and greenbelts that are made for
wandering on foot. You might also be able to plan a route that
takes advantage of public transportation.
Prepare for urban hiking
as carefully as you would for
a backcountry journey.
Review your trip plan with
your Scout leaders and parent
or guardian. Pack rain gear
and extra clothing if there is a
chance the weather will
change, and take along food
and water. Make sure at least
one person in your hiking
group has a well-charged
cellphone, and bring money
for a bus, subway, or taxi if
you discover you must get
home quickly.
Always hike
with at least
one buddy.
Outdoor ethics apply in the city just as they do in
other areas. Leave a good impression wherever
you go. Greet people
along the way.
If you are hiking with a
dog, keep your pet on
a leash and pick up and
properly dispose of
pet waste. Obey traffic
signals. Lend a hand
whenever you can.


HIKING 13
.Get Ready!
Backroads Hiking
America’s quiet backroads
can offer miles of wonderful
hiking. They may lead
through farm fields, hug
riverbanks, drift along in a
shady forest, or head out
into open prairie.
Whenever you hike
on a road, a few simple
precautions will help keep
you safe.
• Walk single file on the
left shoulder so that you
can see oncoming traffic.
• Wear light-colored and
reflective clothing to help
drivers notice you. Even
better are bright orange
vests such as those worn by highway workers and hunters.
• Be ready, if necessary, to step onto the shoulder of the road
to give vehicles plenty of room.
• When you want to cross a road, line up alongside one
another and have everyone cross at the same time.
When hiking on a road, always walk single file on the left
shoulder—facing oncoming traffic.
Never hitchhike. It
can be dangerous,
it is most likely
illegal, and it
spoils the spirit
of a hike.
A backroads hike will present unique opportunities to
observe wildlife, such as this moose.


14 HIKING
Get Ready!.
Snow Hiking
A winter hike can be a terrific way to enjoy cold-weather
adventures. Anticipate the conditions you are likely to encounter,
select routes with obvious landmarks, and plan well. Remember
that territory familiar in the summer can look very different
when it is blanketed with snow. A map and compass or GPS
receiver may come in handy for helping you stay on course.
Sunglasses are important for snow hikers, especially on
clear or hazy days, to protect your eyes from the glare. Leather
boots that have been treated to repel water can keep your feet
dry and warm, and gaiters will prevent snow
from getting into your boots. You might
even need snowshoes to travel
through the deep snow. Choose
clothing that is appropriate for
the season. Take along high-
energy food to power you
through the day, and drink
plenty of fluids to prevent
dehydration. Oh, and don’t
forget the sunscreen.
See the Scouts
BSA Handbook
and Fieldbook for
information about
layering clothing
for comfort.


HIKING 15
.Get Ready!
To travel across snow that is too deep and soft to support
your weight, you may need snowshoes or cross-country skis.
If you are on foot, try to avoid established trails used by cross-
country skiers and snowshoers. Deep footprints punched into
the snow can make it more difficult for those on snowshoes
or skis to fully enjoy their sport.
Snow that is frozen after a cold night can be easy to
hike across in the morning. By afternoon, though, the
sun’s warmth may soften the snow enough that your
legs plunge through with each step. Postholing that
way can be exhausting, so allow plenty of time to
reach your destination.


16 HIKING
Get Ready!.
Tundra Hiking
Hike high enough in mountainous regions and you will reach
an elevation where conditions are too harsh for forests to
survive. The territory above this tree line is called alpine
tundra. A tundra hike can take you up among the summits and
surround you with tremendous scenery.
Alpine tundra is a magnificent and fragile landscape that
requires your utmost efforts to cause it no harm. Growing
seasons are usually quite short, and plants are easily damaged
if people walk on them. The weight of a hiker might compress
the soil, leaving it difficult for roots to penetrate. Protect tundra
by staying on trails whenever possible. As with any hike, follow
In tundra territory,
vegetation is
buffeted by
the wind, and
moisture can be
in short supply.
Be alert for changes in the weather, too. Afternoon
thunderstorms are common at high elevations.
Turn back if the weather begins to worsen, pacing
your hike so that you will be down in the trees
before lightning threatens.


HIKING 17
.Get Ready!
the principles of Leave No Trace and consult with the local land
managers or park rangers about where you will be hiking, to
determine the best way for you to minimize your impact. In
some instances, when no trail or durable surfaces are available
for hiking and you are forced to walk on vegetation, they might
recommend that your group spread out and walk side by side
to minimize impact.
Global Positioning System
Modern technology has provided hikers with
a powerful electronic means of navigation—
the global positioning system. A GPS receiver
accurately calculates the longitude and latitude
of any spot on the globe by taking bearings on
satellites orbiting 12,000 miles above Earth.
If you decide to use one, study the manufacturer’s
instructions and practice using the GPS before you go
hiking. Once you learn to operate a GPS receiver, you
can use it to identify precise locations, determine
elevations above sea level, and plot the path of a trek.
Inputting this information will create a history in the
receiver that can be used if you need to retrace
your steps.
Electronic navigational instruments will surely
continue to improve in accuracy, versatility, and ease
of use. But a GPS receiver (especially one with dead
batteries) is no substitute for being able to navigate the
backcountry with traditional tools. Develop confidence
in your ability to use maps and compasses and then,
if you wish, add to them with a GPS receiver.
Cairns


18 HIKING
Get Ready!.
Desert Hiking
Hiking across arid country will bring you close to remarkable
vegetation, wildlife, and land formations. Carry lots of drinking
water—at least two quarts per person, and more if the day
might be hot. A broad-brimmed hat for warm-weather use will
shade your head, and light-colored clothing can help you stay
cool. Always use sunscreen on exposed skin. Consider doing
desert hiking in the early morning and evening; spend the
hottest part of the day relaxing in the shade. Another option for
desert hiking is to hike at night when there is moonlight,
following the guidelines of night hiking (see page 21). Because
of the lack of trees, a full moon can perfectly illuminate
a desert trail for cooler, nighttime hiking.


HIKING 19
.Get Ready!
Desert vegetation can be as fragile as
it is interesting. Stay on trails so that you do
not trample small plants or compact the soil
around them. Be on the lookout for lizards, snakes, and
other desert creatures. Step lightly, observe from a safe
distance, and enjoy your encounters with them.
Flash flooding is a potential danger for hikers in arid
country, especially at certain times of the year. Follow the Leave
No Trace principles and know the hazards of your area before
you start. If your route becomes blocked by rushing water, wait
until the stream returns to safe levels before attempting to cross.
The blackish crust of
cryptobiotic soil is
home to many living
microorganisms and
is especially delicate.
This living soil, which
can take hundreds of
years to develop, can
be destroyed by a
single footprint.
Storms can quickly fill dry streambeds
with raging torrents, so seek higher
ground during desert downpours.


20 HIKING
Get Ready!.
Cross-Country Hiking
Cross-country hiking invites you to escape everything made
by humans, trails included. You might cross a river or a
lakeshore beach, or the crest of a hill. Or your way might
be determined by a series of compass readings and a map to
keep your bearings.
Staying with your group is as important while hiking cross-
country as it is for any other outdoor adventure. You can share
in all the fun, and be there if anyone needs your help.
Plot your route carefully before you begin a cross-country hike
and you should not be surprised by rivers, cliffs, or other barriers.
If you run into terrain you are not sure you can safely cross, stop
and figure out a better way or go back the way you came. Check
your location frequently to make sure that you are staying on
your planned route.
Smart hikers are
always willing to
turn around if a
route becomes
dangerous.


HIKING 21
.Get Ready!
Night Hiking
Hiking during daylight hours is usually the best way to go. You
can see where you are headed, and others, especially motorists,
can easily see you. There might be times, however, when you
need to complete a journey in the dark. On nights with full
moons, there might be advantages to hiking at night. Remember
The Outdoor Code and be considerate by minimizing
unnecessary lights and noise. Use extra care to stay on your
route, and keep the members of your group together.
If you are caught out after dark and cannot safely
continue—perhaps the trail is difficult to follow, or
group members have become tired, hungry, and
chilled—it may be best to stop for the night. Use
your Scout Basic Essentials, good sense, and any other
resources to keep your group safe and comfortable
until you can move on in the morning light. See the
Wilderness Survival merit badge pamphlet for more
information on making do with what you have.


22 HIKING
Get Ready!.
Trail Hiking
Scouts do much of their hiking on trails. They may choose
pathways leading deep into the backcountry, or shorter
routes connecting points of interest in a Scout camp or a
city. A trail can lead to a mountaintop, a lake, a neighborhood
park, or a prairie.
Trails are opportunities. If
everyone stays on that pathway,
vegetation on either side will not be
trampled and erosion is less likely
to occur. (By contrast, hikers going
cross-country may spread out to
avoid creating unwanted trails.)
Trails often have structures to
help travelers stay safe. Retaining
walls made of rocks or logs
strengthen the sides of trails.
Water bars set across the tread
divert water from the pathway
before it can cause erosion. Bridges
constructed of lumber or logs
carry trails over streams and gorges.
Staircases of wood or stone can
ease steep ascents. Culverts channel
water from rain, springs, and
melting snow under the tread.
Trail Corridors and Switchbacks. Every pathway passes
through a trail corridor—the space cleared of branches and
vegetation above and to each side of the tread. The corridor
gives trail users room to pass with ease. A trail shared with
horseback riders will have a higher and wider corridor than
will a simple foot pathway.
Because water from rainstorms and melting snow can
rush down a pathway and transform it into a gully, trails
climbing a steep hill or a mountain may zigzag at a gentle
grade that is easy on the land and on you. These turns are
called switchbacks. Stay on the pathway and always go
completely around a switchback; don’t take a shortcut from the
upper leg of the trail to a lower leg. Cutting across switchbacks
can crush vegetation and loosen soil. Before long, water from
rainstorms or melting snow can gouge out a trench that ruins
the switchback, exposing the hillside to further erosion.


HIKING 23
.Get Ready!
As you hike a trail, try to figure out why it was built where
it is. Perhaps it swings around the edge of a meadow rather
than leaving a scar through the middle of a clearing. It might
stay back from a lakeshore to help protect fragile vegetation and
nesting grounds. Take a good look at trail structures,
footbridges, retaining walls, drainage devices, etc. Try to
determine how they were constructed and the roles they play.
Many Scout units adopt pathways and take responsibility
for seeing that trails are kept in good shape. Trail maintenance
service projects include cutting back brush, repairing tread,
cleaning out drainage structures, and restoring areas damaged
by erosion.
Hedgehog


24 HIKING
Get Ready!.
Trip Plans
A trip plan prepares you for the challenges of a hike, a
campout, or any other outdoor activity. Write down the
five W’s of a trip plan:
• Where are you going? Decide on a route to your
destination and back. For backcountry trips, include a copy
of a map with your route marked in pencil.
• When will you return? If you are not back reasonably
close to the time on your trip plan, Scout leaders and
family members can take steps to locate you and, if
necessary, provide assistance.
• Who is hiking with you? List the names of your partners.
If you need a ride to or from a trail, write down who will
do the driving.
• Why are you going? To fish in a lake? Climb a peak?
Explore a new area? Write a sentence or two about the
purpose of your journey.
• What are you taking? Always carry the Scout Basic
Essentials. If you are camping out, you might need additional
food, gear, and shelter.
For more on the
Scout Basic
Essentials, see the
“Get Set!” chapter.


HIKING 25
.Get Ready!
Be sure to leave copies of your trip plan with at
least two responsible adults.


26 HIKING
Get Ready!.
Outdoor Ethics and Hiking
Caring for the environment is an important responsibility of
every hiker. Leave No Trace is just one set of principles that can
help you live up to that responsibility and enjoy the outdoors
fully by knowing that you are respecting the environment.
Leave No Trace/The Outdoor Code
As you and your group plan a hike, ask yourselves how you
can follow each of the principles of Leave No Trace. Leave No
Trace and The Outdoor Code are principles that help you
respect the environment and be considerate to others who are
enjoying the outdoors.
Plan Ahead and Prepare. When planning your hike, contact
the land managers of the area you intend to visit or the Leave
No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics (see the resources section
for contact information). Explain your desired route and ask
how you can best implement Leave No Trace. Here are some
additional guidelines to remember.
• Know the regulations and special concerns for the area you
will visit.
• Prepare for extreme weather, hazards, and emergencies.
• Schedule your trip to avoid times of high use.
• Visit the backcountry in small groups no larger than parties
of four to six hikers.
Travel on Durable Surfaces. Stay on existing pathways to help
protect the surrounding landscape from being trampled, eroded,
and compacted.
• In popular areas, hike on durable surfaces such as
established trails, rock, gravel, dry grasses, and snow.
• Protect shoreline vegetation.
• Walk single file in the
middle of the trail,
even if it is wet or
muddy.
• Conduct activities
in areas where
vegetation is
absent.
In pristine areas,
disperse use to
prevent the
creation of new
trails. Avoid places
where impacts
are just beginning.


HIKING 27
.Get Ready!
Dispose of Waste Properly. Remember this solid guideline:
Pack it in, pack it out. Make it easier on yourself by limiting
the amount of potential trash you take.
Especially important is the disposal of human waste. Use
toilet facilities whenever possible. Otherwise, urinate away from
trails, camps, and other gathering places. Choose rocks or bare
ground; animals may strip vegetation in order to consume the
salts left by concentrations of urine. Pack out solid waste, or
use a cathole. Follow the Leave No Trace principles, and check
with the land agency for the area you will visit to find out the
preferred method.
To dig a cathole, choose a remote spot at least 200 feet
from camps, trails, water, and dry gullies. With a trowel, dig
a hole 6 to 8 inches deep in the topsoil. Take care of business,
re-cover the hole, and disguise the site with leaves or other
ground cover. Organic material in the topsoil will slowly break
down the waste, making it harmless.
Leave What You Find. A cluster of flowers beside an alpine trail.
Bricks from a historic homestead. A bird’s nest on a low bush.
Every hike will bring with it a new discovery to see and enjoy.
Here are some reasons why you should leave what you find.
• Future hikers will have the excitement of discovering for
themselves what you have found.
• Plant and wildlife environments will not be harmed. Leave
rocks and other natural objects as you find them. Avoid
introducing or transporting nonnative species.
• Archaeological, cultural, and historic structures and artifacts
preserve a record of America’s past; some are sacred to
American Indians and other Native Americans. Observe, but
do not touch or take.


28 HIKING
Get Ready!.
Minimize Campfire Impacts. Most hikers are prepared to
spend a day outdoors without needing a campfire. If you do
expect to cook or get warm, plan ahead with options that do
not depend on kindling a blaze. In any case, you must follow
the Leave No Trace principles and check with the land agency
before your hike to know when campfires are allowed. In many
areas, fires are discouraged, prohibited, or allowed by permit
only. If you must make a campfire:
• Use established fire rings, fire pans, or mound fires.
• Keep fires small. Use only sticks from the ground that can be
broken by hand.
• Burn all wood and coals to ash, make sure the ashes are cold
out, then scatter the cool ashes.
Respect Wildlife. Sharing the outdoors with wildlife is one of
the great pleasures of hiking. Respect wildlife by always
traveling quietly and observing animals from afar. You are too
close if your actions cause an animal to change its activities.
Always avoid wildlife when they are mating, nesting, raising
young, and during other sensitive times.
Never feed wild animals. Doing so damages their health,
alters natural behaviors, and exposes them to predators
and other dangers. Store all your food and trash securely.
Antelope ground
squirrel
Raccoon
Mallard
Prairie dog


HIKING 29
.Get Ready!
Control pets at all
times, or leave
them at home.
Be Considerate in the Outdoors. Extending courtesy to other
outdoor visitors is a natural habit of hikers. Speak softly and
respect their desire for quiet and solitude. Leave radios and
electronic devices at home. If you carry a cellphone for
emergency communication, turn it off and stow it in your pack
until you need it. Appreciate the company of those you meet on
the trail and at campsites near yours.
Observe proper trail etiquette. If you encounter horseback
riders or pack animals, stop and ask the lead rider what you
should do. The lead rider will probably ask you to step a few
paces downhill from the trail and stand quietly while the
animals pass. If you encounter other hikers or backpackers
going uphill when you are going downhill, give them the
right-of-way. Step aside on a rock or a log to minimize your
impact, and watch your footing when you step below the trail.





HIKING 31
.Get Set!
Get Set!
Setting off on a hike without properly preparing can have
disastrous results. Make sure you are ready, from your
physical condition to the best gear for the trip.
Conditioning
To enjoy hiking to the fullest, you will want to be in good
shape. That is why requirement 3 calls for developing a plan
for conditioning yourself. Begin with short trips, increasing
the length of your journeys as you become more fit. A good
way to prepare for Scout hikes is to walk whenever you can
rather than riding in a car or relying on public transit.
Aerobic Activities
The word aerobic means “with oxygen.” Aerobic activities
increase the rate of your breathing and your heartbeat, and
push your body to use oxygen more efficiently. Aerobic training
can strengthen your circulatory and respiratory systems,
add mass to muscles and bones, burn excess fat, and lead to
improvements in overall fitness. For aerobic activities to be
effective, you must take part in them for half an hour or more
at least three times a week, maintaining enough intensity to
break a light sweat.
Walking a couple
of miles to school
or a friend’s home
may take a little
longer than
driving there,
but it is fun,
economical, and
good for your body.
Swimming might appear to be unrelated to hiking, but it will help
you keep in shape for future hikes.


32 HIKING
Get Set!.
Hiking is one of many aerobic activities you can use to
stay healthy and fit. Other activities include bicycling,
snowboarding, jogging, and swimming. Soccer, basketball,
tennis, and other sports involving constant motion can have a
role in aerobic training, too. The success of aerobic conditioning
lies not so much in the mix of activities you choose, but rather
in enjoying them regularly and pushing yourself each time to
achieve a little more.
Footwear and Foot Care
Almost any shoes will do for short
walks on easy terrain. Rugged trail
running shoes or lightweight boots
with uppers made of nylon or other
tough fabric are fine for most hiking in
good weather. Avoid heavy boots.
Leather boots will give your feet and
ankles added protection and support,
and will keep snow and rain from
soaking your socks. Boots made for
mountaineering or serious winter use
are probably more than you will need
for everyday hikes.
Whatever shoes or boots you
choose, they must fit well. Your heels
should not slip much when you walk,
and your toes should have a little
wiggle room. Break in new boots
before you use them on a long hike. Wear them around at
home whenever you can, and then on walks of increasing
length. If your feet seem slow to adapt to new boots, wear
them with socks that are thinner or thicker than you usually
use; see if that works.
Caring for Shoes and Boots
Clean your footwear after a hike, especially if they have become
caked with mud. Use a brush to remove dried dirt, or wash the
uppers with warm water and a cloth. Allow wet boots and shoes
to dry at room temperature. Too much heat can melt nylon and
cause leather to harden, so do not put your boots too close to a
heat source. Treat leather with boot dressing containing beeswax,
silicone, natural oils, or other protective ingredients that keep it


HIKING 33
.Get Set!
flexible and water-repellent. Warm leather absorbs dressing well.
Set your boots or shoes in the sun for an hour, then rub the
dressing into the leather with a clean cloth or your fingers.
Socks
Socks cushion your feet and help keep them dry. They protect
feet against blisters by reducing the friction between your skin
and your footwear.
Carry an extra pair or two of socks on your hikes.
Changing into clean, dry socks during the day will refresh your
feet. Tie damp socks on the outside of your pack to dry. Also,
some hikers like to wear gaiters to prevent dirt or small rocks
from getting into their shoes.
Modern synthetic fabrics and wool blends do a great job of wicking
moisture away from your skin and keeping your feet dry. For hiking in
trail running shoes, a lightweight pair of synthetic-fiber socks is probably
all you need. For hiking in heavier boots, you might need a heavier sock.
Your local outdoor store can recommend the kind of sock you should
wear. The most important thing is to make sure your foot feels good in the
socks in your hiking shoes. Try them in the store, and then do some short
walks around your home or to school to see if there are any problems. It
is much better to find a problem with your sock or shoe when you’re near
your home than when you’re out on the trail.
Your feet will
carry you more
than 100,000 miles
in your lifetime. Be
kind to them and
they should cover
most of those
miles without
much complaint.


34 HIKING
Get Set!.
Clothing for Hiking
To determine the appropriate clothing for a hike, follow the
principles of Leave No Trace by planning and preparing for
the weather you will encounter, including the possibility of
extreme weather. Wear layers so it is easy to adjust your
clothing to meet changing conditions. Hike in synthetic
materials, not cotton. Today’s synthetic materials can wick
away moisture and are designed to keep you either cool or
warm. Cotton tends to trap moisture, which can be a problem
if the temperature drops.
Clothing for Warm-Weather Hiking
o Scout shirt
o T-shirt
o Hiking shorts
o Long pants
o Sweater or warm jacket
o Sturdy shoes or hiking boots
o Socks
o Hat with a brim for shade
o Bandanna
o Rain gear (poncho
or parka, pants, gaiters)
Clothing for
Cold-Weather Hiking
o Long-sleeved shirt
o Long pants (fleece or wool)
o Sweater (fleece or wool)
o Long underwear (polypropylene)
o Sturdy shoes or hiking boots
o Socks (wool or synthetic blend)
o Warm hooded parka or jacket
o Stocking hat (fleece or wool)
o Mittens or gloves (fleece or wool)
with water-resistant shells
o Bandana
For more on
layering and on
foul-weather
clothing, see
the Scouts BSA
Handbook
and Fieldbook.


HIKING 35
.Get Set!
Hiking Gear
Take the Scout Basic Essentials with you on every outdoor
adventure. The items on the list may help you avoid
emergencies, and they can make a pleasant hike even better.
At least one person in each hiking group should carry a
watch so that you can pace your travels, stick to your trip plan,
and return home when you are expected.
Pack
A fanny pack or day pack will hold
everything you need during a hike.
If you use a small pack to carry your
books to school, it will probably be
fine to use for hiking, too.
The Scout Basic Essentials
o Pocketknife
o First-aid kit
o Extra clothing
o Rain gear
o Water bottle
o Flashlight
o Trail food
o Matches and fire starters
o Sun protection
o Map and compass
Fanny pack
Day pack


36 HIKING
Get Set!.
Sticks and Trekking Poles
Pictures of early Scouts often show them walking with
hiking sticks. You may want to try one, too. A hiking
stick can add rhythm and balance to your stride.
Use it to measure the depth of a stream and to
help maintain better balance.
A hiking stick can be as simple as a dead
branch found on a trailside and used for just
a mile or two. Or, select a straight piece of
ash, oak, or hickory to take on all your hikes.
Whittle your name into it if you want, and
cut a notch for every 10 miles you hike.
A pair of trekking poles has the effect
of putting a hiking stick in each of your
hands. They are a great aid to balance,
especially over rough ground, on snow,
or when you are tired. If you no longer
need them during a hike, trekking poles
that telescope can be reduced to a size
that can be strapped neatly to the
outside of your pack.
Telescoping trekking pole Hiking stick


HIKING 37
.Get Set!
Food and Water
Hiking burns energy. Keep your body well-fueled by having a
nutritious breakfast before a hike, and then carrying food that
will provide the calories you need throughout the day.
You may want to take a bag of trail food to nibble on while
you walk. Granola is the choice of many hikers. So is GORP—
good old raisins and peanuts. Apples, oranges, carrots, and
bananas are fine snacks, too. A solid lunch will see you
through the middle of the day. Sandwiches, fruit, carrots, nuts,
and raisins are all tasty. Instead of sandwiches, you might try
crackers with cheese or
peanut butter.
Water is even more
important to a hiker than
food. Fill at least one water
bottle before you start out,
and sip from it often. In hot
weather, you may need to
carry several water containers.
Treat any water taken from
streams, lakes, or springs
before you drink it.
The Cooking merit
badge pamphlet
has recipes and
ideas for trail
lunches. For
information on
treating water
collected during a
hike, see the
Scouts BSA
Handbook and
Fieldbook.
For a boost of energy along the trail, snack on some
GORP—good old raisins and peanuts.





HIKING 39
.Go!
Go!
As part of requirement 4, you have chosen a good route and
packed your Scout Basic Essentials. You and your hiking
buddies have shared your trip plan with your parent or
guardian and with your Scout leader. You have thought about
how you will apply the Leave No Trace principles and The
Outdoor Code. It is time to hit the trail.
10-Mile Hikes
Set an easy pace for your first 10-mile hike. Hike at the pace of
your slowest companion so your group stays together. An easy
way to do this is to have your slowest hiker be at the front of
the group of hikers. Rest when you get tired. Eat when you are
hungry, and drink water frequently to stay hydrated. Soon you
will know what it feels like to hike for much of a day.
Whether you are on a mountain path or walking through
a city park, there will be plenty to see. Watch the land around
you for interesting scenery and signs of wildlife. If you are
using a map, check it often to discover how far you have
come and where you are going. Keep an eye on the sky, too.
The shapes and motions of clouds can warn you of changes
in the weather.
If your prehike
training is
adequate, 10
miles should be
a comfortable
distance for you.
Bobwhite quail


40 HIKING
Go!.
For requirement 6, write a reflection of your hike when
you get home. Do it while the adventure is fresh in your mind.
Then start planning your next adventure.
Be observant
of your body’s
condition as
well as your
companions’.
Now and then, look back the way you came. If you return by the
same route, you will be familiar with the appearance of the trail
as it looks when you are going in that direction.
Reporting Your Hike
After your hike, write a report to show your
counselor. Your hiking report can be as simple as a
notebook for writing the highlights of each
journey. Where did you go? What did you take?
Who went with you? What did you do? What did
you see and hear? How might you prepare
differently for your next hike? Include a copy
of your trip plan and, if you wish,
photographs, drawings, and maps. As you
complete the hikes required for the Hiking
merit badge, think about what you might
include in your hiking report. It can serve
as a source of information for what you present
to your merit badge counselor. Later on, it will become a
cherished reminder of the great adventures you had while hiking.


HIKING 41
.Go!
20-Mile Hike
Twenty miles is a long way, but with the hiking you’ve done so
far, you will be ready.
Plan your 20-mile hike carefully. Mark on a map any places
you can cut your trip short if weather, weariness, or injuries
surprise you along the way. Where will you be able to find
water? Phone service? A ranger station? Roads? Help if needed?
Have a good breakfast and get an early start so that you
can finish your hike before dark. Carry extra socks that you can
change into during the day. Pack plenty of high-energy foods
both for your lunch as well as for trail snacks throughout the
day. Be sure to plan for an adequate water supply for the trail.
Set out on every hike with the right attitude. Enjoy your
time on the trail. Get the most you can from every opportunity
to explore the outdoors. There is no better adventure than head-
ing out with your friends to discover the freedom of the trail.
Hiking Courtesy
The Scout Law says a Scout is “Helpful, Friendly,
Courteous, Kind, and Cheerful.” The Outdoor
Code reminds us to be considerate in the
outdoors. Hiking should be a friendly activity.
Your adventures may bring you in contact with
other hikers and with people living and working
alongside the routes you choose.
Greet people you meet with a cheerful hello
and step to the side of the trail so that they can
pass. Standard etiquette is to give the right-of-
way to hikers going uphill. Horses and mules
may be spooked by hikers; if you meet people on horseback,
stop where you are and ask the lead rider what to do. You may
need to step a few paces downhill and stand quietly while the
animals pass. Hikers may also share a trail with bicyclists. Step
to the side of the pathway and give them room to pedal by.
Hiking courtesy includes the way you treat others in your
group. Walk at a pace that is comfortable for the slowest hiker.
No one likes to be left behind or be shut out of the fun. Travel
single file on most trails, leaving some space between you and
the Scout ahead of you. You can see where you are going and
you will not run into the person in case of a sudden stop. Finally,
take whatever comes your way as an opportunity for new
adventures, and share your excitement with those around you.


42 HIKING
Go!.
Pace
Hiking 10 or 20 miles in a day is a good challenge. You may
need to maintain a steady pace, conserving your energy and
using your wisdom to cover the distance.
However, a hike is much more than simply covering a
certain number of miles or reaching a destination. Whether
your route is short or long, remember to enjoy the sights and
sounds around you. The journey is every bit as important as
its completion.
If you are hiking at an easy pace and stop often to look at
plants, animals, and scenery, you may not need any rest stops.
However, if you are pushing steadily along, a five-minute break
every half hour or so is a good idea. It will give you a chance to
adjust your clothing, examine your feet for hot spots, take a
drink, and have a snack. Make sure others in your group are
doing well and that the pace is appropriate for them.
The safety and good fellowship of all the hikers in your group
are important. Set a pace that is comfortable for the slowest
member of your group.
A good hiking
buddy also
makes sure that
everyone else
in the group is
keeping well-fed
and hydrated.


HIKING 43
.Go!
Crossing Streams
As adventures take you farther into the backcountry, your
intended routes may sometimes lead you to streams that have
no bridges. Study a stream before you attempt to cross. How
wide is it? How deep? Is the streambed slippery or full of loose
rocks? Wading can be difficult in rushing water, especially in
cold water. Is there any chance you could be swept downstream
into rocks or rapids if you lose your footing? Do not attempt to
wade across water that is knee-deep or higher. Find a safe place
to cross or do not cross at all. If you do decide to walk into a
stream, keep the following in mind.
Wear shoes for traction and protection from sharp stones.
If you know that your hike will involve wading, bring along
water slippers or old sneakers for that purpose. Otherwise,
remove your socks and pull on your boots or hiking shoes over
your bare feet. When you reach the far shore, dry your feet and
put your dry socks back on.
Use a hiking stick or trekking poles for balance as you ford
a stream, or form a human tripod with two other hikers. Facing
inward, form a circle and put your arms around each other’s
shoulders. Lean on one another as you cross.
Before crossing a
stream, unbuckle
the waist belt of
your backpack
and loosen the
shoulder straps.
Doing so will
enable you to
quickly escape
the load if you fall
into the water.





HIKING 45
.Minimizing Risk
Minimizing Risk
Minimizing risk is so much a part of outdoor adventures that
often we hardly notice we are doing it. When you fill bottles with
water from streams and lakes, you deal with the risk of parasites
by treating the water to rid it of microorganisms. When you
share the outdoors with wildlife, you protect them and yourself
by hanging your food out of their reach, eliminating odors from
sleeping areas, and keeping campsites spotless.
A truly effective approach to reducing risk comes from the
willingness of every group member to take an active role in
maximizing personal safety and the safety of others. To help
minimize risk:
• Stay in good shape so you are ready for the physical demands
of a trek.
• Know where you are going and what to expect.
• Adjust clothing layers to match changing weather conditions.
• Drink plenty of water.
• Take care of gear.
A critical aspect of managing risk is letting others know
when you are having difficulties or are aware of a concern that
might affect you or the group. Even if you feel hesitant to speak
up, voicing concern about questionable route decisions or a
developing hot spot, for example, can bring important matters
to the group’s attention.
The more responsi-
bility each person
takes for his or her
own health and
safety, the more
everyone can
contribute to a
successful trek.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk
and first aid, you can be prepared to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any
hiking hazard.


46 HIKING
Minimizing Risk.
Dealing With Health Issues and Injuries
Getting injured while out on the trail is one the biggest risks
for which you need to be prepared. Fortunately, many trail
injuries—scrapes, bruises, blisters, and sunburn—usually are
not very troublesome. Soap, water, bandages, and other items
in your first-aid kit will take care of the majority of medical
problems you may encounter.
However, the danger of a more serious injury is magnified
by your distance from emergency response. Miles up a trail,
you must rely on your own resources and those of your com-
panions. Know how to prevent, recognize, and treat the health
hazards that may arise during a backpacking trip. The brief
discussions that follow are intended only to alert you to the
dangers. Consult a first-aid manual for complete information.
Other good sources of hiking first-aid information are the
First Aid, Backpacking, and Wilderness Survival merit badge
pamphlets; the Scouts BSA Handbook; and the Fieldbook.
Personal First-Aid Kit
Carrying a personal first-aid kit can help you minimize
any injuries that could occur on a hike. Everything
listed below can fit into a self-sealing plastic bag and
be placed in your day pack.
o 6 adhesive bandages
o 2 3-by-3-inch sterile gauze pads
o 1 small roll of adhesive tape
o 1 3-by-6-inch piece of moleskin
o Small bar of soap
o Small tube of antiseptic
o Pair of nonlatex gloves
o Mouth-barrier device (for
rescue breathing)
o Pencil and paper (for documenting
symptoms and treatments)


HIKING 47
.Minimizing Risk
Blisters
For hikers, blisters on the feet are the most common injury—
and they often cause the most trouble. A “hot spot” on your
foot signals the beginning of a blister. Stop immediately and
protect the tender area by covering the hot spot with a piece
of moleskin, moleskin foam, or KT Tape®slightly larger than the
hot spot. Use several layers if necessary—it is much better to
prevent a blister from forming than to have to deal with a blis-
ter once it has formed. Blisters are best left unbroken. If a blis-
ter does break, treat the broken blister as you would a minor
cut or abrasion. Many find products such as Compeed® or
Second Skin® very helpful in treating blisters.
To prevent blisters, wear hiking shoes and socks that fit
properly. If you are wearing boots, make sure you have broken
them in by walking in them on shorter hikes or around your
neighborhood. Keep your feet clean and dry, and change your
socks if they get wet. Toughen your feet with short hikes before
embarking on an extended trek.
Scouting America Recommends…
Scouting America has some general first-aid guidelines for the treatment
of minor injuries. Do not use bare hands to stop bleeding. Treat all blood
as if it were contaminated with bloodborne viruses. This means always
using a protective barrier, preferably nonlatex gloves, and always washing
exposed skin areas with hot water and soap immediately after treating
the victim. Include the following equipment in all first-aid kits, ready for
use when rendering first aid:
• Nonlatex gloves, to be used when stopping bleeding or dressing wounds
• A mouth-barrier device, for rendering rescue breathing or CPR
• Plastic goggles or other eye protection, to prevent a victim’s blood from
getting into the rescuer’s eyes in the event of serious arterial bleeding
Diabetics who
develop blisters
should see a
doctor as soon
as possible
after the trip.
Pay attention
to your feet as
you hike. Deal
with discomfort
immediately.


48 HIKING
Minimizing Risk.
Dehydration
Water is essential for nearly every bodily function. People who
lose more water than they take in risk becoming dehydrated.
The first sign of dehydration usually is dark urine. Other signs
can include weariness, headache, body aches, and confusion.
Heat exhaustion, heatstroke, and hypothermia might all be
caused in part by dehydration.
Prevent dehydration and heat reactions by drinking plenty
of fluids. That is easy to do on hot summer days when you are
thirsty. It is just as important in cold weather when you might
not feel thirsty. Drink enough so that your urine stays clear. At
Make sure you are getting enough electrolytes, which are easy
to get in most hiking foods like GORP or trail snacks.
Sprains and Strains
If you suffer a sprained ankle and need to keep walking, leave
your hiking shoe or boot on to support the injury. If the boot or
shoe is removed, the injury could swell so much that you will
not be able to put it back on. Reinforce the ankle by wrapping
it, including the boot or shoe, with an elastic bandage wrap.
Shock
Shock is a dangerous condition in which there is a sudden drop of blood
flow. The result is that the person’s organs aren’t getting enough blood or
oxygen, which if left untreated could lead to organ damage or even death.
Shock can result from a variety of causes, such as heatstroke, blood loss,
severe burns, an allergic reaction, blood loss, or trauma. Trauma can happen
on a hike if a person falls and suffers a head injury, a bad cut, or a broken
bone. Shock is common after accidents—if a person has an accident, assume
they will go into shock, and along with treating their injuries, treat them for
shock until you are certain that they are not in shock.
Symptoms of shock include cool, clammy, or pale skin, a bluish tinge to
lips or fingernails, rapid pulse or breathing, nausea, enlarged pupils, dizziness
or incoherence, fainting, anxiousness or agitation, or an inability to get warm.
Treat shock by laying the person down and elevating the legs and feet
slightly unless it might cause further injury. Keep the person still and warm.
Loosen tight clothing, and if needed, cover the person with a blanket or a
jacket. Don’t let the person eat or drink anything. Apply other first aid as
needed for allergic reactions, bleeding, or nausea. If the symptoms are
severe, call 911 immediately.


HIKING 49
.Minimizing Risk
To wrap a sprained ankle, start the wrap around the foot, then wrap around the
angle and end on the lower leg.
Don’t Take a Tumble
Keeping safe from falling will make your hiking adventures much more
enjoyable from beginning to end. Trails often are bumpy and have loose
rocks, gravel, and other debris, so watch where you step, every step of the
way. This is especially important if you are hiking along a steep incline.
Remember that if you do slip, you want to fall with your body going
toward the uphill part of the slope, and not downhill, so keep your weight
angling toward the uphill slope as you negotiate rough terrain. Stay
within the boundaries of the trail, behind any protective railing, and obey
all signage. Trekking poles or a walking stick can help you stay upright
even if you trip, stumble, or accidentally step on a loose stone. Don’t get
distracted when you take photographs, talk with companions, or drop
something. Paying attention will help you avoid the pitfalls of injuries
such as a sprained ankle or scrapes and bruises from a tumble.
1
3
2
4 FRONT SIDE


50 HIKING
Minimizing Risk.
Altitude Sickness
If you live near an ocean, your home is probably not much
above sea level. Scouts in the prairie states may be accustomed
to elevations of just 1,000 or 2,000 feet. Going to a place that is
much higher may leave you short of breath because as you go
up in elevation, the atmosphere around you becomes thinner
and contains less oxygen. Within a few days, your body will
acclimate itself by producing extra red blood cells to carry more
oxygen to your tissues and organs, and you should feel fine.
Hikers ascending even higher without allowing time for their
bodies to adjust to the new elevations—perhaps climbing
Philmont’s 12,000-foot Baldy Mountain soon after arriving at the
ranch—can develop headaches and may suffer from nausea.
They may develop AMS, or acute mountain sickness. Symptoms
may include any or all of the following: headache, nausea,
unusual tiredness, and loss of motivation. Additional symptoms,
like coughing, difficulty breathing, or difficulty sleeping could
indicate the onset of high altitude pulmonary edema, a buildup
of fluid in the lungs that can be life threatening.
Whenever you hike at a high altitude, take precautions against acute mountain
sickness. Fortunately, AMS is seldom a problem for people at elevations of less
than 8,000 feet above sea level.


HIKING 51
.Minimizing Risk
Taking steps to prevent altitude sickness is far better than
suffering from it during a hike. The following suggestions can
make a big difference in how well you are able to function
during journeys to high elevations.
• Drink plenty of fluids. As a rule, take in enough water so
that your urine remains clear rather than dark yellow.
• Ascend gradually. Spending a few days at 5,000 to 7,000
feet and then a few more at 8,000 to 10,000 feet will permit
your body to acclimate before you go higher.
These symptoms can also be warning signs of hypothermia,
a far more common first-aid emergency among hikers. Address
hypothermia first by making sure that the person is warm, is
wearing dry clothing, is sheltered from the wind and chilly or
wet weather, and has had enough to eat and drink. If the per-
son does not rapidly improve and he or she is at an elevation
above 8,000 feet, treat for altitude sickness as well.
Treating altitude sickness can be summed up in three
words: Descend, descend, descend! Going down even a few
thousand feet in elevation will almost always relieve the
symptoms. Rest, fluids, and food may also help. If symptoms
persist or worsen, get the person to a doctor. If you know your
route will keep you above 10,000 feet for more than a day or
two, you could consult with your parent or guardian and your
doctor about getting a prescription for an altitude-sickness
medication like Diamox. Do this at least a week before your trip
so you will have time to go through all the necessary steps.
“Climb high, sleep
low” is good
advice for hikers,
skiers, snowshoers,
and other mountain
travelers. While
adjusting to thinner
air, after hiking
upward during the
day, descend to a
lower camp for a
good night’s rest.


52 HIKING
Minimizing Risk.
Hypothermia
When a person’s body is losing more heat than it can generate,
hypothermia sets in. Simple exposure to cold is seldom the only
cause. Exposure to wind and rain, and hunger, exhaustion, and
dehydration are common contributing factors. A hypothermia
victim might feel cold, numb, fatigued, irritable, and
increasingly clumsy. Uncontrollable shivering, slurred speech,
poor judgment, and loss of consciousness might also occur.
Treat a victim of hypothermia by preventing the person
from getting colder. If necessary, use any or all of the following
methods to help warm the body to its normal temperature.
• Move the person into a tent or other shelter and get the
person into dry, warm clothes.
• Zip the person into a dry sleeping bag, or wrap the person
in blankets or anything handy that will be warming. Cover
the head with a warm hat or sleeping bag hood.
• If the person is able to drink, offer small amounts of
warm liquids (cocoa, soup, fruit juices, water; no
caffeine or alcohol).
• Provide water bottles filled with warm fluid to hold in the
armpit and groin areas.
To help prevent hypothermia, carry spare clothing in
case you get wet or if temperatures drop. Be alert for early
symptoms of hypothermia in yourself and others. Take
action to keep full-blown hypothermia from developing.
Monitor the
person closely
for any change
in condition.
Do not rewarm
the person too
quickly (for
instance, by
immersing in
warm water);
doing so can
cause irregular
and dangerous
heartbeat.
If you suspect someone is
suffering from hypothermia,
challenge the person to walk,
heel to toe, a 30-foot line
scratched on the ground. If the
person shows unsteadiness,
loss of balance, or other signs
of disorientation, take
immediate action to get the
victim warm and dry.


HIKING 53
Frostbite
A frostbite victim may complain that his or her
ears, nose, fingers, or feet feel painful and then
numb, but sometimes the victim will not
notice any such sensation. You may see
grayish-white patches on the skin—called
frostnip—the first stage of frostbite.
Only frostnip can be treated out on the trail.
If you suspect that frostbite is deep (extending
below skin level), remove any wet clothing and wrap
the injured area in a dry blanket. Do not rub the injury.
Get the victim under the care of a doctor.
To treat frostnip, move the victim into a shelter, then warm
the injured area. If an ear or cheek is affected, warm the injury
with the palm of your bare hand. Slip a frostnipped hand under
your clothing and tuck it beneath an armpit. Treat frostnipped
toes by putting the victim’s bare feet against the warm skin of
your belly.
Help prevent frostbite by wearing layers of clothing,
keeping dry, and staying hydrated.
Heat Exhaustion
Heat and dehydration can lead
to heat exhaustion. Symptoms
can include pale, clammy skin;
nausea and headache;
dizziness and fainting; muscle
cramps; and weakness and lack
of energy.
If a member of your group
is suffering from heat
exhaustion, get the person in
the shade and encourage the
person to drink small amounts
of fluids. Cool water is best.
Apply cool, wet cloths to the
skin and fan the person to
hasten the cooling process.
Activities can resume when the
person feels better, although
it can take a day or more for
full recovery.
Rewarm any
frostbitten area
only if there
is no chance
of refreezing.
Cool down victims of heat exhaustion as
quickly as possible.


54 HIKING
Minimizing Risk.
Heatstroke
When a person’s core temperature rises to life-threatening
levels (above 105 degrees), heatstroke occurs. Dehydration
and overexertion in hot environments can be factors.
Symptoms include hot, sweaty, red skin; confusion;
disorientation; and a rapid pulse.
Heatstroke is life-threatening; summon medical help
immediately. To treat a heatstroke victim while awaiting help,
work to lower the person’s temperature quickly. Move the
person to a shady location and loosen tight clothing. Fan the
person and apply wet towels. If you have ice packs, wrap them
in a thin barrier (such as a thin towel) and place them under
the armpits and against the neck and groin. If the person is able
to drink, offer small amounts of cool water. Monitor the victim
closely to guard against a relapse.
Sunburn
Sunburn is a common but potentially serious result of overexpo-
sure to the sun. Long-term exposure can result in an increased
risk of skin cancer. Treat sunburn by getting the person under
shade. If no shade is available, have the person wear a brimmed
hat, pants, and a long-sleeved shirt for protection from the sun.
Treat painful sunburn by applying cool, wet cloths.
Lightning Safety
In a thunderstorm, there is no risk-free location outside. Open
water, mountaintops, the crests of ridges, the bases of tall or
solitary trees, and large meadows can be hazardous places
during lightning storms. Plan to be off peaks and other exposed
locations before afternoon, when thunderstorms are more
prevalent. If you are caught in a dangerous area, quickly
move to shore or descend to a lower elevation, ideally away
from the direction of the approaching storm.
A dense forest located in a depression offers the greatest
protection. Stay clear of shallow caves and overhanging cliffs—
ground currents might arc across them. Avoid water and metal
objects, too, and anything else that might conduct electricity.
In tents, stay away from metal tent poles.
If a lightning storm catches your group in the open, spread
out so that people are at least 100 feet from one another.
Remember, a tent
offers NO protection
from lighting.
Wait at least 30 minutes after the last roar of thunder or
lightning flash before resuming your activity.


HIKING 55
.Minimizing Risk
Poisonous Plants
There are a few species of plants you will want to avoid. Some
examples you might encounter are poison ivy, poison sumac,
poison oak, and nettles. If you get in contact with them, they
can cause skin inflammation and itching. “Leaves of three let
them be” is an old warning about poisonous plants. However,
there are many examples of “leaves of three” that are not poi-
sonous. Looking at the differences helps us understand what to
look for. And if you aren’t sure, let it be.
It is important to know what poisonous plants look like,
wear long pants, and stay on the trail. If you do contact these
plants, rinse with cold water and wash with soap and cold
water or ideally Tecnu, to remove the poisonous oil before it
has a chance to absorb into your skin.
Are the labeled plants above poison ivy? Test your knowledge, then turn the page
upside down to check your answers.
A: Jack-in-the-pulpit • B: Hognut hickory • C: Poison ivy • D: Briars • E: Poison ivy • F: Oak


56 HIKING
Minimizing Risk.
Insect Stings
To treat bee stings, scrape away the stinger with the edge of a
knife blade, but don’t squeeze the sac attached to the stinger—
that might force more venom into the skin. Applying an ice
pack to the area can reduce pain and swelling caused by
insect stings.
Tick Bites
Ticks are small, blood-sucking creatures that bury their heads
in the skin. Protect yourself in tick-infested woodlands and
fields. Wear long pants and a long-sleeved shirt. Button your
collar and tuck your pant legs into your boots or socks. Inspect
yourself daily, especially the hairy parts of your body;
immediately remove any ticks you find.
If a tick has attached itself, remove it immediately. Grasp
it with tweezers close to the skin and gently pull until it comes
loose. Do not squeeze, twist, or jerk the tick, as that may leave
its mouth parts buried in the skin. Wash the wound with soap
and water, and apply an antiseptic. After handling a tick,
thoroughly wash your hands.
Only some ticks carry Lyme disease. A red ring
might appear around the bite. A victim might feel
tired and have flulike symptoms. Anyone having
such symptoms in the days and weeks following
a trek should see a physician.
If a tick has been embedded for more
than a day or poses difficulties in
removal, see a doctor.
Chiggers are almost invisible. These
tiny insects bite the skin, causing small
welts and itching. Try not to scratch
chigger bites. Covering the bites with
hydrocortisone cream will provide
some relief.


HIKING 57
.Minimizing Risk
Snakebite Don’ts
• Don’t make any cuts on the bite, apply suction, apply a tourniquet,
or use electric shock (such as from a car battery). All of these so-called
remedies can cause more harm to the victim and are not proven
to be effective.
• Don’t apply ice to a snakebite. Ice will not help the injury but may
damage the skin and tissue.
• Don’t give the victim alcohol, sedatives, or aspirin. Doing so could
hasten the absorption of venom, aggravate nausea, or fuel fear and
panic in the victim.
Snakebites
There are two types of venomous snakes in the United States.
Pit vipers (rattlesnakes, copperheads, and cottonmouths)
have triangular heads with pit marks on either side of the
head. Coral snakes have black snouts and bands of red and
yellow separated by bands of black. Coral snakes inject
powerful venom that works on the victim’s nervous system;
pit-viper venom affects the circulatory system.
The bite of a nonvenomous snake causes only
minor puncture wounds. If a crew member has
been bitten by a snake that you are certain is
nonvenomous, clean the wound with soap
and water, then treat with an antiseptic.
The bite of a venomous snake
may cause sharp, burning pain. If you
are not certain whether a snake is
venomous, assume that it is
venomous. Get the victim under
medical care as soon as possible so
that physicians can neutralize the
venom. The venom might not affect the
victim for an hour or more. Within that
time, the closer to medical attention
you can get the victim,
the better.
Remember: Red and black, friendly jack;
red and yellow, deadly fellow.
Snakes are not
warm-blooded
and therefore
cannot carry rabies.
Milk snake


58 HIKING
Minimizing Risk.
Safety Around Dogs
It is not unusual to come upon dogs as you walk through cities,
towns, and near farms. You may meet them on trails, too. Since
you are a stranger to them, they might snarl and bark at you.
Avoid eye contact; talk to the dogs you encounter in a calm,
quiet voice and give them plenty of room as you pass. Do not
threaten them, but if you have a hiking stick or trekking poles,
keep them between you and the animals. Cross to the far side
of the road or trail if you can, or avoid a dog’s territory by
taking another route.
Do all you can to prepare for a mishap before it occurs.
Study the First Aid merit badge pamphlet and the
chapters on first aid in the Scouts BSA Handbook and
Fieldbook. Practice rescue techniques with your patrol
and troop. Check with your local council office for train-
ing opportunities in your area such as those offered by
the American Red Cross and other local groups.


HIKING 59
.Minimizing Risk
Safety Around Wild Animals
Seeing deer, raccoons, skunks, squirrels, and other animals that
make their homes in the outdoors is a special part of any hike.
If wild animals must alter their normal habits, you are too
close. They are not likely to become aggressive unless they feel
threatened. Enjoy watching wild animals, but keep your
distance. Do not disturb nests or burrows.
Do not come between a mother animal and her offspring.
Be vigilant and avoid surprising wild animals. Some animals
like rattlesnakes
and bobcats have
good camouflage,
so keep your eyes
open. You don’t
want to surprise
the animal. In
some cases with
low visibility, like
a winding trail in
a forest, you might
want to maintain
a steady
conversation just
so the animals
know that you are
coming, so you
don’t surprise it.
Be aware of the kinds of predatory animals you might
meet during your adventures. Wolves, coyotes, and
cougars are curious. Information about the animals you
might encounter on your hike and how to respond to
them can be found online, or you can ask a park ranger
on site. If you encounter an animal, do not approach it,
run, or play dead. Instead, hikers should come together
as a group, face the creature, and slowly retreat. If for
some reason you are alone (never a good idea), make
yourself look “big”—raise your arms and clothing above
your head. Be noisy, but do not run or shout. Stay calm,
back away, and avoid making direct eye contact.
Coyote





HIKING 61
.Hiking Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook; Deck
of First Aid; Basic Illustrated Wilderness
First Aid; Emergency First Aid pocket
guide; Be Prepared First Aid Book;
Conservation Handbook; Backpacking,
Camping, Cooking, First Aid, Geocaching,
Orienteering, and Wilderness Survival
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Instruction and Guidebooks
Anderson, Kristi. Wilderness Basics,
4th ed. Mountaineers Books, 2013.
Berger, Karen. More Everyday Wisdom:
Trail-Tested Advice From the Experts.
Mountaineers Books, 2002.
———. Hiking and Backpacking. DK
Publishing, 2008.
———. Hiking Light Handbook: Carry
Less, Enjoy More. Backpacker
Magazine, Mountaineers Books, 2004.
Birkby, Robert. Lightly on the Land:
The SCA Trail Building and
Maintenance Manual, 2nd ed.
Mountaineers Books, 2006.
Burns, Bob. Wilderness Navigation:
Finding Your Way Using Map,
Compass, Altimeter and GPS, 3rd ed.
Mountaineers Books, 2015.
Carline, Jan. Mountaineering First Aid:
A Guide to Accident Response
and First Aid Care. Mountaineers
Books, 2004.
Cole, David. NOLS Soft Paths: Enjoying
the Wilderness Without Harming It,
4th ed. Stackpole Books, 2011.
Fleming, June. Staying Found: The
Complete Map and Compass
Handbook, 3rd ed. Mountaineers
Books, 2001.
Fletcher, Colin, and Chip Rawlins. The
Complete Walker IV. Knopf, 2002.
Forgey, William. Basic Illustrated:
Wilderness First Aid, 2nd ed.
Falcon Guides, 2015.
Graham, John. Outdoor Leadership:
Technique, Common Sense, and
Self-Confidence. Mountaineers
Books, 1997.
Hiking Resources


62 HIKING
Hiking Resources.
Grubbs, Bruce. Exploring With
GPS: A Practical Field Guide for
Satellite Navigation. Bright Angel
Press, 2014.
Hooks, Christine. Essential Hiking for
Teens. Children’s Press, 2000.
Jacobson, Cliff. Basic Illustrated:
Map and Compass, 3rd ed. Falcon
Guides, 2008.
Jacobson, Cliff, Scottie Barnes, and
James Churchill. The Ultimate Guide
to Wilderness Navigation. Lyons
Press (Globe Pequot Press), 2002.
Kals, W.S., and Clyde Soles. Land
Navigation Handbook: The Sierra
Club Guide to Map, Compass, and
GPS, 2nd ed. Counterpoint, 2010.
Lanza, Michael. The Day Hiker’s
Handbook: Get Started With the
Experts. Mountaineers Books, 2003.
Logue, Victoria. Hiking and Backpacking:
Essential Skills, Equipment, and
Safety, 2nd ed. Menasha Ridge
Press, 2013.
———. Kids Outdoors: Skills and
Knowledge for Outdoor Adventures.
Ragged Mountain, 1996.
Marion, Jeffrey. Leave No Trace in the
Outdoors. Stackpole Books, 2014.
McGivney, Annette. Leave No Trace: A
Guide to the New Wilderness
Etiquette, 2nd rev. ed. Mountaineers
Books, 2003.
McKinney, John. The Joy of Hiking:
Hiking the Trailmaster Way.
Wilderness Press, 2005.
McVey, Vicki. The Sierra Club
Wayfinding Book. Sierra Club
Juveniles, 1991.
Musnick, David, and Mark Pierce.
Conditioning for Outdoor Fitness.
Mountaineers Books, 2004.
Robbins, Michael W. The Hiking
Companion. Storey Books, 2003.
Schimelpfenig, Tod. NOLS Wilderness
First Aid, 7th ed. Stackpole Books,
2021.
Tilton, Buck. Outdoor Safety Handbook.
Stackpole Books, 2006.
Organizations and Websites
AllTrails
alltrails.com
American Hiking Society
8403 Colesville Rd., Suite 1100
Silver Spring, MD 20910
800-972-8608
americanhiking.org
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
P.O. Box 997
Boulder, CO 80306
800-332-4100
lnt.org
Sierra Club
2101 Webster St., Suite 1300
Oakland, CA 94612
415-977-5500
sierraclub.org
Student Conservation Association
1310 N. Courthouse Rd., Suite 110
Arlington, VA 22201
888-722-9675
thesca.org


HIKING 63
.Hiking Resources
Magazines
Backpacker magazine
backpacker.com
Scout Life magazine
scoutlife.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee and to Dr.
Gordon Craig, Jon Mewes and Mike
Gordon for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Hansell F. Cross, Georgia State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 56 (chigger)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
pages 6 (1906 photo) and 7 (1906,
1912 photos)
Mountain Safety Research (MSRGear.
com), courtesy—pages 15
(snowshoes)
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Scott Bauer, courtesy—page 56 (tick)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Ken
Hammond, courtesy—page 13 (moose)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—6 (ladybird
beetles), 23 (Canada geese),
27 (nest), 28 (ground squirrel,
mallard, raccoon, prairie dog),
39, and 59 (coyote)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—page 34 (gloves)
W. Garth Dowling—page 18
Daniel Giles—page 52
Roy Jansen—pages 41–42
Beth Katz—page 55
John McDearmon—page 49
(ankle wrapping)
Roger Morgan page 60 (hikers)
Brian Payne—cover (milk snake);
pages 4, 14 (applying sunscreen),
15 (Scouts in snow), 19 (dry
streambed), 30 (basketball), 31, 32
(cleaning shoes), 36 (Scout with
trekking poles), 38, 40 (Scout looking
back), 57, and 60
Randy Piland—page 43
Jesse Scofield—page 41


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.