Nova WILD!

This module is designed to help you learn about wildlife and the natural world around you.
1. Choose A or B or C and complete ALL the requirements:
A. Watch an episode or episodes (about one hour total) of a show about wildlife, endangered
species, invasive species, food chains, biodiversity, ecosystems, or wildlife habitats. Then do
the following:
1. Make a list of at least two questions or ideas from what you watched.
2. Discuss two of the questions or ideas with your counselor.
Some examples include—but are not limited to—shows found on PBS (“NOVA”), Discovery Channel,
Science Channel, National Geographic Channel, TED Talks (online videos), and the History Channel.
You may choose to watch a live performance or movie at a planetarium or science museum instead
of watching a media production. You may watch online productions with your counselor’s approval
and under your parent’s supervision.

B. Read (about one hour total) about wildlife, endangered species, invasive species, food chains,
biodiversity, ecosystems, or wildlife habitats. Then do the following:
1. Make a list of at least two questions or ideas from what you read.
2. Discuss two of the questions or ideas with your counselor.
Books on many topics may be found at your local library. Examples of magazines include but are
not limited to Odyssey, KIDS DISCOVER, National Geographic Kids, Highlights, and OWL or
owlkids.com .

2.

C. Do a combination of reading and watching (about one hour total) about wildlife, endangered
species, invasive species, food chains, biodiversity, ecosystems, or wildlife habitats. Then do
the following:
1. Make a list of at least two questions or ideas from what you read and watched.
2. Discuss two of the questions or ideas with your counselor.
Complete ONE adventure from the following list for your current rank or complete option A or
B. (If you choose an Adventure, choose one you have not already earned.) Discuss with your
counselor what

Wolf Cub Scouts
Digging in the Past
Spirit of the Water

Bear Cub Scouts
A Bear Goes Fishing
Critter Care

Webelos Scouts
Into the Wild
Into the Woods

Option A: Do all of the following. (a) Make a poster that shows and explains the water cycle. (b)
Set up a simple weather station to record rainfall, temperature, air pressure or evaporation for
one week. (c) Find the local weather forecast. Discuss with a family member the weather
forecast. Follow-up by discussing the accuracy of the forecast the following day.
Option B: Do all of the following. (a) Explain what natural resources are and why it’s important
to protect and conserve them. (b) Make a poster that shows and explains the food chain.
Describe to your den or adult what happens when the food chain becomes broken or damaged.
(c) Learn about an endangered species. Make a report to your den or adult that includes a
picture, how the species became endangered, and what is being done to save it.
3.

Explore.
A. What is wildlife? Wildlife refers to animals that are not normally domesticated (raised by
humans).
B. Explain the relationships among producer, prey, predator, and food chain. (You may draw
and label a food chain to help you answer this question.)
C. Draw (or find) pictures of your favorite native plant, native reptile or fish, native bird, and
native mammal that live in an ecosystem near you. Why do you like these? How do they fit
into the ecosystem?
D. Discuss what you have learned with your counselor.

4.

Act like a naturalist. Choose TWO from A or B or C or D or E or F, and complete ALL the
requirements for those options.
A. Investigate the endangered species in your state.
1. Make a list, drawing, or photo collection of three to five animals and plants that are
endangered.

2. Design a display (a poster, PowerPoint presentation, or other type of display) to show at
least 10 of the threatened, endangered, or extinct species in your state. (You may use your
drawings or photo collection in your display.)
3. Discuss with your counselor the differences between threatened, endangered, and extinct
species. Discuss how threatened animals or plants could become endangered or extinct.
How might the loss of these animals or plants affect the ecosystem and food chain? What
can be done to preserve these species?
B. Investigate invasive species.
1. Make a list, drawing, or photo collection of at least five mammals, plants, fish, birds,
insects, or any other organisms that are invasive in your state or region of the country.
2. Design a presentation (a poster, PowerPoint presentation, or other display) including at
least one of the invasive species from your list. Explain where they came from, how they
got to your area, what damage they are causing, and what is being done to get rid of
them. Share your presentation with your counselor and your family or your den.
3. Discuss with your counselor what an invasive species is, how invasive animals or plants
cause problems for native species, and how these invasive species could affect an
ecosystem and food chain.
C. Visit an ecosystem near where you live.
1. Investigate the types of animals and plants that live in that ecosystem.
2. Draw a food web of the animals and plants that live in this ecosystem. Mark the
herbivores, omnivores, and carnivores. Include at least one decomposer or scavenger.
3. Discuss with your counselor (using your food web drawing) how the animals or plants in
the food web fit into a food chain. Which animals are predators and which can be prey?
How does each plant and animal obtain its energy? Describe the energy source for all the
plants and animals.
D. Investigate one wild mammal, bird, fish, or reptile that lives near you.
1. Create a diorama representing the habitat of this creature. Include representations of
everything it needs to survive; its home, nest, or den; and possible threats. You may use a
variety of different materials within your diorama (usually constructed in a shoebox or
similar container).
2. Explain to your counselor what your animal must have in its habitat in order to survive.
E. Investigate your wild neighbors.
1. Make a bird feeder and set it up in a place where you may observe visitors. The feeder
could be complex or as simple as a pinecone covered with peanut butter and rolled in
birdseed and then tied with a string to an appropriate location, like a tree branch.
2. Fill the feeder with birdseed. (Make sure that your feeder does not remain empty once
you have started feeding birds.)
3. Provide a source of water.

4. Watch and record the visitors to your feeder for two or three weeks. (It may take a while
for visitors to discover your food source.)
5. Identify your visitors using a field guide, and keep a list of what visits your feeder. (Visitors
are not always birds! Sometimes deer, rabbits, chipmunks, squirrels, and raccoons visit
bird feeders—or the area under the feeder! The kinds of nonbird visitors will depend on
where you live. You may want to investigate how to collect the tracks of any nighttime
visitors.)
6. Discuss with your counselor what you learned about your wild neighbors.
F. Earn the Cub Scout World Conservation Award (if you have not already earned them for
another Nova award).
5.

Visit a place where you can observe wildlife. Examples include parks (national, state, and local),
zoos, wetlands, nature preserves, and national forests.
A. During or after your visit, talk to someone about:
1. The native species, invasive species, and endangered or threatened species that live there.
If you visit a zoo, talk to someone about the ecosystems for different zoo animals and
whether any of the zoo animals are invasive in different areas of the world. (For example,
pythons are often found in zoos, but they are an invasive species in Florida.)
2. The subjects studied in school that enable him or her to work with wildlife. Examples of
experts to talk to include forest ranger, wildlife biologist, botanist, park ranger, naturalist,
game warden, zookeeper, docent, or another adult whose career involves wildlife.
B. Discuss with your counselor what you learned during your visit.

6.

Discuss with your counselor:
A. Why wildlife is important
B. Why biodiversity is important
C. The problems with invasive species and habitat destruction

2022 January

