CITIZENSHIP
IN THE COMMUNITY
35870_Cover_rg.indd 1 11/12/15 3:00 PM


CITIZENSHIP IN
THE COMMUNITY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
35870.indd 1 11/12/15 2:59 PM


Requirements
1. Discuss with your counselor what citizenship in the community
means and what it takes to be a good citizen in your community.
Discuss the rights, duties, and obligations of citizenship, and
explain how you can demonstrate good citizenship in your
community, Scouting unit, place of worship, or school.
2. Do the following:
a. On a map of your community or using an electronic device,
locate and point out the following:
(1) Chief government buildings such as your city hall,
county courthouse, and public works/services facilities
(2) Fire station, police station, and hospital nearest
your home
(3) Parks, playgrounds, recreation areas, and trails
(4) Historical or other points of interest
b. Chart the organization of your local or state government.
Show the top offices and tell whether they are elected
or appointed.
3. Do the following:
a. Attend a meeting of your city, town, or county council
or school board; OR attend a municipal, county, or state
court session.
b. Choose one of the issues discussed at the meeting where
a difference of opinions was expressed, and explain to
your counselor why you agree with one opinion more
than you do another one.
4. Choose an issue that is important to the citizens of your
community; then do the following:
a. Find out which branch of local government is
responsible for this issue.
35870
ISBN 978-0-8395-3249-1
©2015 Boy Scouts of America
2015 Printing
35870.indd 2 11/12/15 2:59 PM


CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 3
b. With your counselor’s and a parent’s approval, interview
one person from the branch of government you identified
in requirement 4a. Ask what is being done about this issue
and how young people can help.
c. Share what you have learned with your counselor.
5. With the approval of your counselor and a parent, watch
a movie that shows how the actions of one individual or group
of individuals can have a positive effect on a community.
Discuss with your counselor what you learned from the movie
about what it means to be a valuable and concerned member
of the community.
6. List some of the services (such as the library, recreation cen-
ter, public transportation, and public safety) your community
provides that are funded by taxpayers. Tell your counselor why
these services are important to your community.
7. Do the following:
a. Identify three charitable organizations outside of Scouting
that interest you and bring people in your community
together to work for the good of your community.
b. Pick ONE of the organizations you chose for requirement
7a. Using a variety of resources (including newspapers,
fliers and other literature, the Internet, volunteers, and
employees of the organization), find out more about
this organization.
c. With your counselor’s and your parent’s approval, contact
the organization you chose for requirement 7b, and find out
what young people can do to help. While working on this
merit badge, volunteer at least eight hours of your time for
the organization. After your volunteer experience is over,
discuss what you have learned with your counselor.
8. Develop a public presentation (such as a video, slide show,
speech, digital presentation, or photo exhibit) about important
and unique aspects of your community. Include information
about the history, cultures, and ethnic groups of your commu-
nity; its best features and popular places where people gather;
and the challenges it faces. Stage your pres-entation in front of
your merit badge counselor or a group, such as your patrol or
a class at school.
35870.indd 3 11/12/15 2:59 PM


CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY 31
.Resources
Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; American Business,
American Cultures, American Heritage,
Citizenship in the Nation, Citizenship
in the World, Communication, Crime
Prevention, Photography, Public
Speaking, and Scouting Heritage
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Abress, Monica Dwyer. Quietly at Work:
Township Government in America.
Specialty Press Publishers, 2000.
Bankston, John. Careers in Community
Service. Mitchell Lane Publishers, 2001.
Bowman, Ann, and Richard C. Kearney.
State and Local Government.
Houghton Mifflin Company, College
Division, 2001.
Brownlie, Alison. Charities: Do They
Work? Raintree Publishers, 1999.
Burns, James M., and others. State &
Local Politics: Government by the
People. Prentice Hall, 2001.
Coplin, William D. How You Can Help:
An Easy Guide to Doing Good Deeds
in Your Everyday Life. Routledge, 2000.
Gary, Lawrence. How to Win a Local
Election: A Complete Step-by-Step
Guide. M. Evans, 1999.
Isler, Claudia. Volunteering to Help
in Your Neighborhood. Scholastic
Library Publishing, 2000.
Jungreis, Abigail. Know Your
Hometown History: Projects and
Activities. Franklin Watts, 1992.
Lewis, Barbara A., Pamela Espeland,
and Caryn Pernu. Kids’ Guide to
Social Action: How to Solve the
Social Problems You Choose—
and Turn Creative Thinking
Into Positive Action. Free
Spirit Publishing Inc., 1998.
Kielburger, Marc, and Craig
Kielburger. Take Action! A Guide
to Active Citizenship. John Wiley
& Sons Inc., 2002.
Perry, Susan K. Catch the Spirit: Teen
Volunteers Tell How They Made
a Difference. Scholastic Library
Publishing, 2000.
Ryan Jr., Bernard. Community Service
for Teens 8-Volume Set. Facts on
File, 1998.
Rusch, Elizabeth. Generation Fix:
Young Ideas for a Better World.
Beyond Words Publishing Inc., 2002.
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for
a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
35870.indd 31 11/12/15 3:00 PM


32 CITIZENSHIP IN THE COMMUNITY
Resources.
Organizations and Websites
GovSpot
Website: http://www.govspot.com
Kids Care Clubs
975 Boston Post Road
Darien, CT 06820
Website: http://www.kidscare.org
National Constitution Center
Independence Mall
525 Arch St.
Philadelphia, PA 19106
Website:
http://www.constitutioncenter.org
National Crime Prevention Council
2345 Crystal Drive, Suite 500
Arlington, VA 22202
Website: http://www.ncpc.org
USA.gov
Office of Citizen Services
and Communications
U.S. General Services Administration
1800 F St. NW
Washington, DC 20405
Website: http://www.usa.gov
U.S. Census Bureau
Website: http://www.census.gov
VolunteerMatch
Website: http://www.volunteermatch.org
Youth Activism Project
Website: http://www.youthactivism.com
Youth Service America
Website: http://ysa.org
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to
Harry C. Boyte, Ph.D., codirector, Center
for Democracy and Citizenship, for his
assistance with developing the revised
requirements. The Center, which seeks
to “address the growing gap between
citizens and government,” also aims
to “develop citizenship initiatives and
the concept of public work.” Thanks to
Robert Hildreth, also of the Center, for
his contribution.
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the men and women serving on the
Merit Badge Maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Adam Prince, http://www.gribblenation.
com, courtesy—page 16
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—cover (city
hall sign, ©dustin77a; donation box,
©Africa Studio; church, ©Matyas
Rehak); pages 4 (©wavebreakmedia),
6 (©Rawpixel), 9 (©Derek Hatfield),
18 (©Sean Locke Photography), 20
(©Evlakhov Valeriy), and
26 (©Monkey Business Images)
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Daniel Giles—page 29
Roy Jansen—page 8
Brian Payne—pages 10, 13, and 23–24
(both)
Randy Piland—page 21
35870.indd 32 11/12/15 3:00 PM