COMPOSITE
MATERIALS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35877
ISBN 978-0-8395-2165-5
©2012 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 3
Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you
may encounter while working with composite materi-
als and what you should do to anticipate, mitigate and
prevent, and respond to these hazards. Describe the
appropriate safety gear and clothing that should be
used when working with composite materials.
b. Explain the precautions that must be taken when
handling, storing, and disposing of resins, reinforce-
ments, and other materials used in composites. Include
in your discussion the importance of health, safety,
and environmental responsibility and awareness.
c. Describe what a safety data sheet (SDS) is and tell
why it is used.
2. Do the following:
a. Explain what composite materials are. Include a brief
history of composites and how they have developed.
b. Compare the similarities and differences between
composites and wood, aluminum, copper, and steel.
Describe the physical, electrical, mechanical, corrosive,
flammability, cost, and other such properties. For each
of these raw materials, give one example of how it
can be shaped and used for a specific application.
3. Describe how composite materials are made. Then do
the following:
a. Discuss three different composite reinforcement
materials, their positive and negative characteristics,
and their uses. Obtain the SDS for each one and
discuss the toxicity, disposal, and safe-handling
sections for these materials.


4 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
b. Discuss three different resins used in composites,
their positive and negative characteristics, and their
uses. Obtain the SDS for each one and discuss
the toxicity, disposal, and safe-handling sections
for these materials. Include thermoset resins and
thermoplastic resins in your discussion.
c. For each of the three resins you chose for require-
ment 3b, think of a new application that might be
worth developing.
4. With your parent’s permission and your counselor’s
approval, do ONE of the following:
a. Visit a company that manufactures or repairs
products made with composites. Discuss what
you learn with your counselor.
b. Find three composites-related websites. Share and
discuss what you learn with your counselor.
5. Do the following:
a. Use composite materials to complete two projects, at
least one of which must come from the Composite
Materials merit badge pamphlet. The second project
may come from the pamphlet OR may be one you
select on your own that has been approved by your
counselor in advance.
b. With your counselor’s assistance, find an appropriate
site where the projects can be safely completed under
your counselor’s supervision and/or the supervision
of an adult approved by your counselor who is
knowledgeable about composites.
c. With your counselor, determine how the finished
projects will be evaluated. Using those guidelines,
evaluate the completed projects with your counselor.
6. Find out about three career opportunities in composite
materials. Pick one and find out the education, training,
and experience required for this profession. Discuss this
with your counselor, and explain why this profession
might interest you.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 5
.Glossary
Glossary
additive. A material added to a resin to enhance its performance.
Additives include colorants and flame retardants.
advanced composite. A composite that is applied in high-
performance applications, such as aircraft or military applications.
anisotropic. Materials having different strengths or properties in
different directions; a quality of composites.
aramid fiber. A synthetic reinforcing fiber used in body-armor
fabric and other applications; short for aromatic polyamide,
commonly called Kevlar.
carbon fiber. A high-performance, synthetic reinforcing fiber
known for its light weight, high strength, and high stiffness. It is
produced by “baking” or “charring” rayon, pitch, or acrylic fibers
at temperatures above 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit.
casting. A mixture of resin and fillers poured into a mold,
usually without fiber reinforcement, and left to cure to form
the final product.
closed-mold process. Manufacturing process where reinforcements
and resins are closed to the atmosphere and processed in a two-
sided mold or within a vacuum bag.
composite, or composite material. A material that is made up of
two or more different materials that, when combined, are stronger
than the individual materials; generally referred to as composites.
compression molding. A closed-mold manufacturing process
in which composite materials are compressed between matched
molds under high pressure and heat until the part cures. Used for
molding large quantities of complex parts.
compressive strength. The ability of a material to resist a
crushing or buckling force.
conductive. Capable of transferring electrical current.
crosslinking. The chemical bond that turns liquid resin into a
solid material.


6 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Glossary.
curing. The chemical process that converts a resin into a
hardened state.
epoxy resin. A thermoset resin having excellent strength,
adhesion, and corrosion protection.
exothermic. The quality of resin to give off heat when it cures.
fabric. Arrangement of fibers held together in two dimensions.
fiber. Slender, threadlike material that is much longer than it is
round and is an individual strand in a fabric.
fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) composite. Material in which a
polymer resin contains reinforcing fibers providing greater strength
and stiffness than either the resin or fiber alone. FRP composite is a
more specific term than the general word, “composites.” Sometimes
referred to as advanced composites.
filament. A single element in a fiber; the smallest unit of a
fibrous material.
filament winding. An open-mold manufacturing process that
applies resin-saturated, continuous strands of fiber reinforcements
over a rotating cylindrical mold; used for creating hollow products
like rocket motor casings, pipes, and chemical storage tanks.
filler. A material added to resins to improve the appearance and
performance of composites and lower the cost.
gel coat. The outermost surface layer of resin; a special polymer
resin that enhances the surface appearance and performance
of composites.
glass fiber. A fiber made from molten glass (silica, sand, limestone,
and other minor ingredients), available in several types such as
A-glass, E-glass, S-glass, and C-glass. Also called fiberglass.
hand lay-up. An open-mold manufacturing process in which a
reinforcement is applied to the mold by hand and resin is applied
with a brush or roller onto the reinforcement.
hardener. A chemical added to a thermoset resin to cause a
curing reaction.
honeycomb. A manufactured core material of resin-saturated
sheet material formed into six-sided cells or openings and used
in sandwich construction.
hybrid composites. A composite laminate of two or more
different fiber reinforcements, such as glass and carbon fiber,
combined in a single structure.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 7
.Glossary
impact strength. The ability of a material to resist an abrupt or
shock load.
initiator. A hardener, sometimes called a catalyst, that causes the
cure of a thermoset resin.
isotropic. Having uniform properties in all directions; a quality
of metal.
laminate. Two or more layers of fiber reinforcement bonded
together with a resin.
material safety data sheet (MSDS). A document that includes
detailed information on a material, including health and physical
hazards, exposure limits, and precautions.
mil. A unit of measurement that defines the diameter of glass
fibers (1 mil = 0.001 inch).
mold. A tool for forming composite materials into the desired
shapes or parts.
monomer. A single molecule that is a constituent of a polymer.
nonconductive. Incapable of transferring electrical current.
open-mold process. Manufacturing process where reinforcements
and resins are exposed to the atmosphere.
ply. A term used to describe a single layer of reinforcement
in composites.
polymer. A large molecule made up of many units that are linked
together in a chain. Polymers can be naturally occurring, such as
starch, or synthetic, such as polyester.
prepreg. A reinforcement that is saturated with resin and ready
to use for molding; short for “preimpregnated,” meaning the fibers
have been presoaked with resin.
pultrusion. A closed-mold manufacturing process to form
composites into long, consistent shapes like rods or bars.
Continuous strands of reinforcement are pulled through a resin
bath to saturate them, then pulled through heated steel molds
that shape the composites into continuous lengths. Pultruded
products include fishing rods and golf club shafts.
reinforcement. A term for fibers, particles, or “whiskers”
(thin hairlike materials) used in composites. Fibers are the
most common reinforcement in composites and greatly
influence composites’ properties.


8 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Glossary.
resin. A polymer (plastic) that binds together reinforcing material
in a composite.
resin transfer molding. A closed-mold manufacturing process
in which reinforcement material is placed in a closed mold, into
which resin is injected under pressure.
roving. A loose bundle of untwisted yarns or strands of a
reinforcing material.
sandwich construction. Two relatively thin laminate sheets
(“face skins”) bonded to a lightweight core material such as
honeycomb, balsa, or varieties of foam.
solvent. A liquid substance capable of dissolving or dispersing
other substances. In working with polymer resins, solvents such
as acetone are commonly used for cleanup.
spray-up. An open-mold manufacturing process in which a
chopper gun is used to chop reinforcement material and add
it to resin, which is then sprayed onto a mold. This process is
used in boat manufacturing.
storage life. The period of time during which a liquid resin,
initiator, or other chemical can be stored under specified
temperatures and remain suitable for use. Also called shelf life.
strand. A bundle of filaments, normally untwisted.
tensile strength. The ability of a material to resist forces that
stretch the material.
thermoplastic resins. Resins that are not crosslinked and so
can be melted, formed, remelted, and re-formed.
thermoset resins. Resins that are converted from a liquid to a
solid through irreversible crosslinking.
vacuum bag molding. A closed-mold manufacturing process
in which a vacuum is created to force the laminate against a
mold, thus removing trapped air and excess resin and compacting
the laminate.
vinyl ester. A type of thermoset resin related to epoxy resin and
commonly used in corrosion protection.
wet-out. The process of thoroughly saturating reinforcements
with resin.
yarn. A twisted bundle of continuous filaments, fibers, or strands,
used for weaving fabric reinforcements.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 9
.Composite Materials Resources
Composite Materials Resources
Scouting Literature
Chemistry, Engineering, Inventing, Model
Design and Building, Robotics, and Space
Exploration merit badge pamphlets
Books
Marshall, Andrew C. Composite Basics,
7th ed. Marshall Consulting
Publishing, 2005.
Rutan, Burt. Moldless Composite
Sandwich Aircraft Construction.
Rutan Aircraft, 2005.
Strong, A. Brent. Fundamentals of
Composites Manufacturing: Materials,
Methods, and Applications. Society
of Manufacturing Engineers, 2007.
Periodicals
Composites Manufacturing
American Composites Manufacturers
Association
Telephone: 703-525-0511
Website: www.acmanet.org/cm-magazine
Composites Technology
Gardner Publications Inc.
Telephone: 513-527-8800
Website: www.compositesworld.com
Organizations and Websites
American Composites Manufacturers
Association
Website: www.acmanet.org
American Society for Composites
Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering and Engineering Mechanics
University of Dayton
Website: www.asc-composites.org
Center for Composite Materials
University of Delaware
Telephone: 302-831-8149
Website: www.ccm.udel.edu
CompositesWorld
Website: www.compositesworld.com
MSDS Online
Website: www.ilpi.com/msds
NetComposites
Website: ww.netcomposites.com
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration
Toll-free telephone: 800-321-6742
Composites safety website:
www.osha.gov/SLTC/
composites/index.html
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


10 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Composite Materials Resources.