MODEL
DESIGN AND
BUILDING
STEM-Based


MODEL DESIGN
AND BUILDING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Model-Design-And-Building or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35919
ISBN 978-0-8395-3280-4
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
FPO


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 3


4 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 5
Contents
The Art of Modelmaking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Safe Use and Care of Hand Tools . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Scale . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Materials and Finishes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Architectural Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Structural Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Process Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Mechanical Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Industrial Models . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Mission: Fantasy Spacecraft or Handheld Prop . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Modelmaking As a Career . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Model Design and Building Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63





.The Art of Modelmaking
The Art of
Modelmaking
A movie theater rumbles as a star destroyer glides across the
screen. An architect unveils his or her vision for a new down-
town skyscraper. A sports car slices effortlessly through the
wind as it zips along a mountain road. A child wades through
a replica of the Mississippi River, traveling a “mile” every few
steps. A train enthusiast puts the finishing touches on an
elaborate basement layout. A Scout creates a futuristic samurai
warrior using parts from several Japanese mecha kits.
What unites these scenes is modelmaking, the art of
creating copies of objects that are either smaller or larger than
the objects they represent. Sometimes the model comes first,
as with architectural models. Sometimes the model copies
something that already exists, such as that replica of the
Mississippi River. Sometimes the model comes first and last.
For example, car designers build small models first, then
factories turn out full-scale versions, and then toy companies
build small-scale replicas for kids to play with.
Mecha is a term
from Japanese
animation that
refers to giant
robots and
other fantastic
mechanical
objects. Mecha
model kits are
popular in Japan.
This model of a submarine was used in the 1989
movie The Hunt for Red October.


8 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
The Art of Modelmaking.
A lot of people think that modelmaking is just a fun
hobby—and it certainly is fun to build a samurai warrior or a
model-train layout. But models can have serious purposes, too.
As you work on this merit badge, you will get to experience
both the fun and the serious sides of modelmaking and learn
how modelmaking can be both a hobby and a career.
Types of Models
People make and use models for all sorts of reasons. Architects
build models to help others understand what new structures
will look like. Car designers put models in wind tunnels to test
their aerodynamics, or wind resistance. Teachers use models to
help students understand very big things (like the Mississippi
River) or very small things (like molecules). Filmmakers use
models—either “real” ones or
those that exist only in a
computer—to create scenes
that would otherwise be
impossible to film, like
star destroyers gliding
through space. Those
are just some ways
people use models.


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 9
.The Art of Modelmaking
For example, civil engineers use models in designing dams
and flood-control structures, while mechanical engineers use
them to determine the placement of pipes and ventilation
equipment in buildings. Furniture designers use models to help
make chairs more comfortable and tables more attractive, while
police detectives use them to replicate crime scenes. Other uses
for professional-quality models are listed in the section of this
pamphlet that discusses modelmaking as a career.
Filmmakers today
rely on computer-
generated
imagery—CGI—
to create many
special effects,
but they still use
physical models
(or miniatures).
Requirement 4 asks you to build one of the following
types of models that are used in business and industry.
• Architectural—a model of a house
• Structural—a model showing corner construction
of a wood-frame building
• Process—a model of the plumbing system
in a house
• Mechanical—a model of a mechanism that does
some kind of work
• Industrial—a model of a passenger-
carrying vehicle
Before choosing which type of model
to build, be sure to get your counselor’s
advice. Although only one model is
required for this merit badge, you may
want to build more than one.





.Safe Use and Care of Hand Tools
Safe Use and Care
of Hand Tools
Depending on the models you make for this merit badge, you
will need to use a variety of hand tools. By using your tools
safely, you will avoid accidents, reduce injuries, prevent dam-
age to the tools, and build better models. By caring for your
tools correctly, you will ensure their usefulness for many years
to come.
Use power
tools only
under the close
supervision of a
responsible adult.
If you have earned a Totin’ Chip for knife and ax safety,
you already know how important safety is. The Totin’
Chip is like a driver’s license for carving and shows that
you understand how to use woods tools safely. If you
don’t have a Totin’ Chip pocket certificate yet, ask your
Scoutmaster how you can earn one. You will need it to
participate in many Scout activities, so carry it with you
at all times.
My Responsibility
I will take this card to my Scout leader or someone designated by my leader. I
will demonstrate the following:
1. I have read and understand woods tools use and safety rules
from my handbook.
2. I can demonstrate proper handling, care, and use of the
pocketknife, ax, and saw.
3. I will use the knife, ax, and saw as tools, not playthings, and
only when I am willing to give them my full attention.
4. I will respect all safety rules to protect others.
5. I will not use or point a knife in a threatening manner.
6. I will not cut standing trees or shrubs without specific permission from the
landowner and good reason.
7. I subscribe to the Outdoor Code.
Scout’s signature
SKU 649155
34397 2024 Printing
©2024 Scouting America
FPOThis is to certify that the bearer
has read the woods tools use and safety rules from
the “Tools“ chapter of the Scouts BSA handbook.
This Scout knows that the ownership or use of
woods tools means responsibility, and accepts it.
In consideration of the above, this Scout is hereby
granted “Totin’ Rights.”
Scout leader _______________________________


12 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Safe Use and Care of Hand Tools.
General Tips
There are many dos and don’ts to keep in mind when using tools.
• Never work alone when using power tools.
• Use each tool for what it was made to do—never for any-
thing else. For example, use a screwdriver only for driving
screws, not as a chisel or a pry bar.
• Inspect your tools and use only tools that are in good
working condition. Broken tools could hurt you or
damage your model.
• Get out only the tools you need and return them to your
toolbox as soon as you are finished. This will keep your
work area neat and prevent damage to the tools.
• Take good care of your tools. Keep them clean, oiled,
and sharp.
Face and Hand Protection
Using the proper equipment will prevent most accidents, but be
prepared for the unexpected. Whenever appropriate, wear gloves
and a face shield or goggles. Make sure the face shield headband
fits properly (follow the manufacturer’s instructions on proper
fit), and be sure to clean or wipe the goggles after use.


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 13
.Safe Use and Care of Hand Tools
Hand Tools
Hammers and Mallets. Always use the face of the hammer
when striking an object, and use only the amount of force
needed. Use claw hammers for wood and ball-peen hammers
for metal. Only use a hammer’s claw for removing nails.
Handsaws. Use a vise to secure the
material being sawed. To prevent
buckling or breaking, adjust the blade
tension and make sure blades are
installed firmly in the correct position.
While working, provide enough clear-
ance so that, as you saw, the point of
the saw will not strike any object. Use
steady, even strokes without bend-
ing the blade. Saws most commonly
cut on a forward stroke, so apply
more pressure on that stroke. When
you are finished sawing, carefully wipe
the blade clean and store the saw safely
in a tool rack. Make sure other tools are
not on top of the blade.
Screwdrivers. Choose the correct blade
size when using a screwdriver. Keep
the handle directly over the screw
head and turn with smooth, even
strokes while applying steady
pressure on the screw.
Ball-peen hammer
MalletClaw hammer
Flathead (slotted)
screwdriver
Phillips screwdriver
Coping saw
Hacksaw


14 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Safe Use and Care of Hand Tools.
Clamps (C-Clamps, Bar Clamps). Use the proper size clamp,
and do not overtighten the clamp. Otherwise, you could dam-
age your materials or work surface. Always keep clamps clear
of saws and drilling equipment.
Bench Vises. Always attach the vise to a firm work stand and use
the vise—never your hands—to secure materials. Use just
enough pressure to securely hold materials. Stay
clear of the vise body during drilling or cutting
operations. When you are done, close the vise and
leave the handle straight up and down.
Hand Files. Always use a file with
a handle. Cut in the direction for which the
file was intended, and keep hard objects from
striking the file teeth or
handle. After use, clean a file with a file
card (a special tool with metal bristles)
or a wire brush, and store files in a
single layer (never on top of
each other)
in a dry place.
Use vises and clamps to help keep your project in place while
you work.
Bench vise
Hand files


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 15
.Safe Use and Care of Hand Tools
Chisels and Gouges. Always wear safety goggles when
carving, and select tools big enough for the job. Use a chisel
or gouge on metal only if it is a “cold chisel” meant for
metal, and use only wooden mallets to hammer on
chisels and gouges. Before you begin, clamp
the material securely in a bench vise.
Chip toward the stationary jaw of
the vise, using the blade, not
the point or corner. When
you are done, cover the blades
and store your carving tools
in a dry area.
Wrenches (Open-end, Adjustable, Socket). Use the correct
size wrench. Pull the wrench toward you, not away from you.
Tighten bolts so they are secure but not too tight. It is rarely
necessary to use extension bars on wrenches when
tightening or loosening bolts.
Pliers. Be sure your fingers
or hands do not get pinched
between the handles of pliers.
When using cutting pliers or
wire cutters, cover the piece you
are cutting or point it away from
you and other people. The cut
piece may become airborne.
Have a profes-
sional sharpen
or regrind your
tools as needed.
Improper mainte-
nance could
permanently
damage your
tools.
Chisel
Gouge
Pliers
Socket wrench set
Open-ended wrench
Adjustable wrench


16 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Safe Use and Care of Hand Tools.
A dull tool is a
dangerous tool.
Whittler’s
knives
Utility knife
Craft knives
Cordless drill
Hand drill
Scriber
Knives. Use sharp blades that do not have any nicks. Cut away
from your body. When you are done, cover the blade and put
the knife away.
Scribers. Use a scriber to mark centerlines
or cut lines on plastic material. Use the
scriber only for its intended purpose, not as
a center punch, pry, or pick. When carrying
a scriber, hold it by the handle with the
point away from you.
Hand Drills and Routers.
Use a vise or clamp to secure
the material being drilled. Do not force
a drill into the work, and never hit the
handle with a hammer or mallet. Avoid
taking heavy cuts through material, and
run routers and drills at the correct speed
for the material. Keep the bit away from
any clamping device. As you work,
use a brush to sweep
away chips.


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 17
.Safe Use and Care of Hand Tools
Drill Bits, Countersinks, and Router Bits.
Always use sharp bits. Tighten the shank of the
drill bit securely in the chuck; never use pliers to
tighten a bit. Cut only materials for which the
router bits were designed.
Portable Power Tools
Before using any portable power tools, talk to your
counselor and the owner of the tools about the safe
and proper operation of the tools you plan to use. Here
are some simple guidelines to remember:
• Use portable tools only for the work they are meant
to do. Ask your counselor if you think you might
need to use a more heavy-duty tool.
• When using a corded power tool, arrange the cord so
that it will not be in the way of the operation.
• Carry a portable power tool by
its handle, not its cord.
• When unplugging a power tool,
grasp the plug head, not the cord,
and pull straight out from the wall
socket or extension cord.
Drill bits
Router bits
Use tools only
under the close
supervision of a
responsible adult.


Scale.
Scale
What does the word scale mean? The word has many defini-
tions. You can weigh things on a scale. A fish has scales. You
can do something on a grand scale, meaning larger or bigger
than normal.
In engineering and modeling, scale has two main meanings.
First, a modelmaker or machinist uses a ruler that is called a
scale. Second, scale is used to describe proportion, or how the
size of the model compares with the size of the actual object.
The relationship between the model and the original is
expressed as a ratio, which uses two numbers to show how the
size of one thing relates to the size of another. The first number
represents the model’s scale in multiples of the original’s size,
which is the second number.
If someone said to you, “I’m going to build a model of this
telephone to double scale,” that would mean the finished
model would be twice as big as an average telephone. The
model telephone would have a scale of 2:1, meaning two
inches on the model would equal one inch on the original.
If someone said, “I’m going to build a one-third-scale model of
this automobile,” you would know the
finished model would be only one-
third as big as a real car. The model
car would have a scale of 1:3. Of
course, that would still be one
big model!
The word gauge is
sometimes used in
model railroading,
where it refers to
the distance
between the rails
in a train layout.
Today, however,
most model rail-
roaders talk about
scale, not gauge.


Some areas of modeling have standard scales. Model trains,
for example, are typically HO scale (1:87) or N scale (1:160).
Model airplanes usually have a scale of 1:72 or 1:144 (for airliners
and other large aircraft), although other standard scales are some-
times used.
Architects and designers regularly use scales such as 1:50,
1:100, 1:200 & 1:500. Because these common scales are familiar to
them, they can understand the models more quickly and easily.
If you were building a hangar for a model stealth fighter, for
example, you would want to be sure to use the same scale as the
plane model. In other cases, you get to choose the scale. Typically,
you choose the scale based on how big you want the model to be.
Measuring Systems
The two basic systems used for measurements are the foot-and-
inch (or imperial) system, and the metric system, in which the
meter is the basis of all length measurements. In this pamphlet,
we will use the foot-and-inch system. When we talk about scale
from now on, we will be talking about the proportions of models
or plans as they relate to a one-foot, zero-inch ruler.
As a basis for model scales, the one-foot ruler has
12 equal parts, each of which is called an inch. The ruler
can easily be divided:
• With two parts, each part equals 6 inches.
• With three parts, each equals 4 inches.
• With four parts, each equals 3 inches.
• With six parts, each equals 2 inches.
• With 12 parts, each equals 1 inch.


20 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Scale.
The 6-inch-long part is said to be one-half (1:2) scale or
proportion. The 4-inch-long part is said to be one-third (1:3)
scale or proportion.
If a model is to be built to a scale of 6" = 1'0", that
means the finished model will be one-half (1:2) scale, or one-
half the size of the real thing. A replica modeled to a scale of
3" = 1'0" would be built to one-fourth (1:4) scale, or one-
fourth the size of the original.
Of course, because of the size of the original, most models
of things like buildings, automobiles, airplanes, and stage sets
are built to an even smaller scale. For example, a model built to
a scale of 1
⁄4" = 1'0" would be only 1
⁄4" long or high for each
foot of the “real” item. The proportion would be 1:48, or 1
⁄48 the
item’s actual size. That is because a one-foot ruler has 48
pieces that are 1
⁄4" long.
Earlier, we said that one definition of scale is a ruler used
by modelmakers and machinists. This isn’t a ruler like you use
in school, however, but a wonderful tool called an architect’s
scale. This triangular ruler displays 11 common scales and a
regular one-foot ruler and helps modelmakers build models to
almost any scale.
ONE FOOT AT
1/8" SCALE
ONE INCH DIVIDED
INTO EIGHT PARTS
ENLARGEMENT
OF 1/8" SCALE
Triangular architect’s scale


How is it possible to get so many scales on one ruler? Each
side includes four different rules, two at the top and two at the
bottom. In the illustration, you can see the 1
⁄8", 1
⁄2", and (at the
opposite end of the ruler) the 1
⁄4" and 1" scales. Unlike ordinary
rulers, architect’s scales have numbers running from left to
right and from right to left. In the illustration, for example, the
1
⁄8" = 1'0" scale runs from left to right and is labeled 0, 4, 8,
12, etc.; the 1
⁄4" = 1'0" scale runs from right to left and is
labeled 0, 2, 4, 6, etc.
Let’s see how the 1
⁄4" scale looks on the architect’s scale.
Notice in the illustration how the first 1
⁄4" is divided into 12
small spaces. Think of that 1
⁄4" section as a miniature footlong
ruler. Each small space can then be used as a guide for 1" at
the 1
⁄4" scale.
Each scale on an architect’s scale is read in a similar way.
For example, look at the 3
⁄4" scale provided in this book. At that
scale, each “real” foot vertically or horizontally would be mod-
eled as 3
⁄4" long. Because there are 16 pieces measuring 3
⁄4" in a
one-foot ruler (count them and you will see), the ratio will be
1:16, or 1
⁄16 size. Every foot of the real object would be 16 times
larger than the model.
The 1⁄4" = 1'0" scale, shown actual size
1/2
0 2 4 6 8 10 12
1 2/1 9 6 3 0
2


22 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Scale.
You can buy an architect’s scale for a few dollars at an office or school-
supply store. Learning to use this basic modelmaker’s tool can be easier
when you are holding the actual scale in your hands. You don’t have to
buy an architect’s scale, however, to build your models for this merit
badge. This pamphlet provides duplicates of the 11 scales on the archi-
tect’s scale. When you choose a scale to build your model, simply cut the
scale from the page and glue it to a piece of cardboard or wood. Be sure
the marks line up with the edge of the cardboard.
Reading an Architect’s Scale
The following examples show how to read the 1
⁄4" scale on an architect’s scale.
How long is dimension A? _________________
How long is dimension B? _________________
How long is dimension C? _________________
Check your answers with your merit badge counselor.
Glue the scale from the edge of the page to a cardboard or wood backing.
A
B
C
9'6"
12'10"
4'1"
GLUE
CUT THE SCALE FROM
THE PAGE EDGE. EDGES TOGETHER
CARDBOARD OR WOOD








MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 25
.Materials and Finishes
Materials and Finishes
Modelmakers are experts on materials and finishes. They use
all sorts of surprising things for making models. A trip to a
local model supply store will give you ideas, but you can also
find many useful materials around your house. This section
offers ideas about where to find modeling materials.
Glue and Paint
Most types of models require supplies like glue or paint.
Be sure to use materials that will not damage your model.
Some glues and paints contain solvents that can eat away
the finish or materials of your model. Test the glue or paint
by dabbing a little on a scrap piece to see what happens.
Your counselor can also help you choose the right supplies.
Wood and Polystyrene Foam
Wood is probably the most common material used for models.
Wood can be nailed or glued with model-airplane cement, and
it sands well for a nice finish. Soft woods such as balsa, pine,
or basswood are ideal. You can buy thin sheets of such wood at
hobby stores, or salvage them from orange crates and other
packing boxes. Some models are made from larger blocks of
wood and are carved or sawed to the shape desired. Large
blocks of dense polystyrene foam work well, too.
When using glue, epoxy, paint, or
thinners, be sure to read and follow
the manufacturer’s instructions. Work in
a well-ventilated area so that you won’t
breathe in the fumes, which can be harmful.
Avoid skin exposure when handling these
products. Use protective nonlatex gloves as needed.
Be sure the
products you
choose are
compatible with
the types of
materials used
in your model.


26 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Materials and Finishes.
Tongue depressors,
craft sticks
Straws, uncooked
spaghetti, dowels,
coat-hanger wire,
pencils, matchsticks
Plastic foam meat
tray (flat bottom)
Straight pins,
thumbtacks
Sandpaper
(different colors)
Twigs from shrubs
Cotton, lichens,
sponges
Plaster of paris
Soup or vegetable
cans, oatmeal canisters
Rubber bands
Cloth or canvas
Clear bread
wrappers,
plastic wrap
Sewing thread
Sawdust sprinkled over
wet rubber cement
and painted green
Wood or metal beams, house
siding, links in a breadboard
or 3-D mechanical model
(which we will discuss later)
Pipes and columns, axles,
push rods, dowels, fence
posts, telephone poles
House wall sections, inside
walls, floors and other flat
surfaces, staircases
Indicators of valve locations
on straw pipes; temporary
fasteners to hold plastic foam
in place while gluing; pivot
points for breadboard models
Rooftops, blacktop driveways,
textured surfaces
Trees
Shrubs, tree foliage
Irregular shapes
Tanks on process models;
rollers, large pipes
Belt or chain drives
Coverings for irregularly
shaped surfaces
Window glass
Cables, telephone wires
Grass
Use on ModelMaterial


.Materials and Finishes
Cardboard
Another common material in model building is cardboard.
Thick corrugated cardboard is the material used to make most
moving boxes and packing boxes. Thinner cardboard such as
that used to make shoeboxes and gift boxes can also be used.
Manila file folders, an everyday office supply, are a source for
very thin cardboard.
Many architects use foam core to build models. This inex-
pensive material, found at art supply stores, consists of a piece
of plastic foam sandwiched between two sheets of poster
board. It costs more than cardboard, but it is more effective for
creating curves. Modelmakers cut foam core with a utility knife,
which allows more precision on the cuts.
Materials and Uses
The chart to the left will help you get started collecting materials
for your modelmaking project.
Selection
As you gather items for your model, select strong materials. For
instance, you would not use thin cardboard or plastic foam as a
pushrod in an engine model. The cardboard would buckle, and
the foam might crunch. Something stronger, like wood or metal,
would work. Similarly, a coat-hanger wire might bend if used
for a long pushrod, though it might work well as a short one.
Craftsmanship
Consider craftsmanship when you
assemble your model; make it look its
best. In business and industry, models
are often used to test how the real
product will work, to help sell an idea,
or to explain a mechanism or process
to a client. Be sure to apply all your
materials well so that your model
looks polished and professional.
You can use
adhesive tape
on cardboard,
but white glue
and rubber
cement hold
better and are
more permanent.
Remember,
choose your
project and get
your counselor’s
input and approval
before you begin.
Use your
resources wisely.





MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 29
.Architectural Models
Architectural Models
Architecture is the art of designing buildings. Architects and
engineers often use models to show, in miniature, how
buildings they design will look before construction begins on
the full-scale structure. Models are important design aids
because even the most careful drawings and blueprints might
not include all the details that can be shown in a model, and
not everyone is familiar with reading printed drawings or
understanding computer drawings.
For requirement 4, you can create a model of your family
home, a famous building like the White House, or an elaborate
tree house. Or maybe you would rather build a frontier fort, a
futuristic home, or the living quarters of an orbiting space station.
Plans and Materials
First, draw a floor plan of the building you want to model. If
you are making a model of an existing structure, draw a floor
plan based on your careful measurements. Check your local
library or a building-supply store for ideas.
Drawings are
flat, or two-
dimensional, while
a model shows
a structure in
three dimensions.
BEDROOM
CLOSET CLOSET CLOSET
CLOSET
DINING ROOM
KITCHEN
GARAGE
LIVING ROOM
ENTRY
FLOOR PLAN
1/8"=1'0"
56'-0"
22'-0"
23'-0"
32'-0"
BEDROOM
BATH HALL
LAUNDRY
You can use the sample floor plan shown here, or base your design
on a floor plan found in a book or magazine.


30 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Architectural Models.
The sample plan is drawn to a scale of 1
⁄8" = 1'0". Thus,
the outside dimensions of the house—32'×56'—are drawn on
the plan as 4"×7". The height of the house is not shown, but
for a typical one-story house you can assume a standard height
of 8' from the top of the foundation to the eaves (the overhang-
ing edges of the roof). Usually, there is another 4 feet from the
eaves to the peak of the roof. Requirement 4 specifies that the
model be built to a scale of 1
⁄4" = 1'0". This means that a
model based on the sample floor plan would measure 8"×14"
and be 3" high from foundation to roof peak.
Use the floor plan’s dimensions in measuring and marking
the building materials for your model. You may use wood or
cardboard. Cardboard is inexpensive, easy to get and use, and
durable if treated with reasonable care. Wood is strong and
attractive, but heavier and more difficult to manipulate.
Steps in Assembly
The following drawings illustrate some
basic steps in modeling a simple building.
Step 1—Construct the base of the house first. This will allow
you to see the width of the walls. Measure the base by placing
a copy of the floor plan over your base material. Make sure it is
to scale, then cut out the dimensions for the base.
Use your
imagination, and
experiment with
creative types of
construction and
unique styles.
Some hobbyists
build elaborate
model houses
using building
materials such as
plastic, foil, or
polystyrene foam.
If you choose wood, consider using lattice wood from
a lumberyard. Lattice wood is a 1
⁄4"-thick wood that
comes in long strips in widths from about 3
⁄4" to 3".
An 8' strip of lattice wood 11
⁄2" wide costs very little and
can provide a large amount of the material required for
a fair-sized house model.
Basic steps in assembling a house model
Step 2
Step 3
Step 1


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 31
.Architectural Models
Step 2—Measure and cut out the exterior walls. Draw and cut
out the window and door openings. (It is easier to cut out door
and window openings at this stage, while the walls can be laid
flat on a work surface. It is much harder to make neat openings
after the walls are fastened together.)
Step 3—Apply glue to the edges and assemble the walls. Glue
the walls to the base. If you plan to later add a porch, walkway,
shrubbery, trees, or other outside features (be creative!), extend
the base far enough beyond the walls of the house to allow
room for the additions.
Step 4—Make a peaked roof from one large piece of cardboard,
scored and folded at the peak. To score cardboard, make a shal-
low groove by running a dull knife blade along the line where
the fold is to be. A butter knife works well. Use a ruler as a
guide so that the score and the fold will be straight. Make the
score on the inside of the fold—in this case, on the underside of
the roof. If you want a detachable roof (so you can look inside
the model or add interior walls later), do not glue it down. Cut
the roof so that it hangs slightly over on the ends and sides.
Think outside the
box as you design
your building.
The cardboard
tubes on which
aluminum foil,
plastic wrap, and
toilet paper are
wrapped can be
used to create
castle towers or
round rooms in
a modern office
building or trans-
fer tunnels in a
space station.
To make a basic house model more realistic and attrac-
tive, add some architectural details.
• Cut and fold cardboard to form a front porch and
steps, or make them from blocks of wood.
• Use thin strips of wood or cardboard to add shutters,
window frames, and door frames.
• Use clear plastic or transparent adhesive tape for
windowpanes. Glue colored tissue paper or fabric
behind windows for curtains.
• Attach an extra room or shed simply by adding a
box to the main structure.
• To add a chimney, first fashion a small box. Then,
cut an angled notch from the bottom of opposite
sides of the box to fit the slope of the roof.
• Add interest to a large, unbroken expanse of roof
by attaching dormer windows as shown in
the drawings.


32 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Architectural Models.
Outside Treatments
Finish your architectural model with an interesting surface
texture or treatment. The following are ideas for wall and
roof finishes.
Walls
• Paint or stain shutters and door and window trims a con-
trasting color from the walls.
• Draw light pencil lines to look like wood siding.
• With a pointed tool, scribe shallow, parallel grooves to look
like tongue-and-groove siding.
• Glue on strips of thin cardboard or balsa wood to resemble
clapboard siding. Clapboard (pronounced “KLA-bird”) siding
consists of boards that are overlapped horizontally. Vinyl sid-
ing usually mimics the look of clapboard siding.
• To create a concrete effect, apply a sand texture. Paint a heavy
layer of glue onto the walls. Sprinkle on a handful of fine
sand, such as that used in aquariums. Let the glue harden,
then tap off the extra sand. Try substituting sawdust or ashes
for sand to create unusual surface textures and finishes.
• For a stucco effect, brush a little water over each unattached
cardboard wall section and apply an even layer of white glue.
Sprinkle generously with plaster-repairing powder, then tap
off the extra powder. Lay the wall facedown on a clean piece
of cardboard and rub the back to make the treated surface
smooth. Turn the wall faceup and let the glue set.
• To color the walls, use spirit-based wood stain, shellac, or
paint. When the paint has dried, back each wall with a piece
of thick cardboard for extra support.
When choosing
materials, try to
find finishes such
as paint or varnish
that can be used
on several
different (or all)
parts of
your model.
1" 11⁄2" 1"
11
⁄2"
11⁄2"
Measure and cut out the dormer.
The proportions can be changed to fit
your model’s size and style. Score and
fold along the dotted lines.
Make the window
separately and fit it into the
dormer opening.


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 33
.Architectural Models
• Apply individual cardboard “bricks.” Cut small rectangles
from colored cardboard and glue them onto the walls. To
keep the rows of brick even, draw guidelines or glue graph
paper onto the walls. Spread enough white glue over a sec-
tion of wall to lay about three square inches of bricks at a
time. Position each brick with the point of a knife. To get a
red-brick look, paint the walls with a wash of mahogany
wood stain. Use shellac to imitate yellow bricks.
Roof Surfaces
• Lay cardboard tiles. Cut individual roof tiles from very thin
cardboard. Mark guidelines on the roof to help you
keep the rows even as you glue on each tile, using the
point of a knife to accurately position each one. Cap
the peak of the roof with ridge tiles. To make ridge
tiles, cut a narrow strip of thin cardboard. Score it
down the middle and then cut the strip into individual
tiles. Fold each tile in half along the score line and
glue it onto the roof ridge. Color the roof with a
wash of mahogany wood stain. Or, to mimic roofing
slates, color with gray, blue, and white washes.
• Use masking tape to imitate wooden shingles. Cut
rectangles from strips of masking tape and apply the
tape shingles in the same way as cardboard tiles.
(Use wood stain to color the roof and to dull the
shine of the masking tape.)
• Glue on straw or reeds to create the effect of a
traditional English thatched roof.
• Apply aluminum foil to suggest a metal roof. Overlap
strips of foil and fold the strips together with raised
seams to show the different panels of metal and how
they interlock.
Remember, the more detail you add to the model,
the better it will look.
For the most
realistic effect,
overlap and
stagger each
row of tiles.
Running bond
Herringbone
Stacked bond
Apply sand, stucco, and brick effects before the
walls are glued together so that you can work
with the walls laid out flat.





MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 35
.Structural Models
Structural Models
An architectural model shows what a building will look
like, but it doesn’t necessarily show how the building
will be constructed. The walls and roof in an architec-
tural model might be little more than flat sheets of
cardboard or wood, leaving out studs, joists, and
other parts that real buildings require. A structural
model, however, shows details of construction.
The individual pieces that make up floor,
wall, and roof structures are reproduced
in miniature.
One option for requirement 4 is to
build a model showing corner construc-
tion of a wood-frame building. If you
have never helped build a house or
watched one being built, you will need
to understand some basic concepts before
you can build an accurate construction
model. The next section outlines basic steps in
framing a home’s floors, walls, and roof supports.
Wood-Frame Construction
Most houses are built on concrete slabs or masonry block
foundation walls. The first wooden member that goes on the
foundation is the sill. Sills are placed flat (horizontally) on top
of the slab or concrete foundation walls all around the structure
and are secured to the foundation with anchor bolts. The mate-
rial typically used for sills is 2"-by-6" lumber, known to
builders as 2×6s.
Regional building codes may require the doubling
of the sill plate due to the threat of heavy winds
or earthquakes.
CEILING JOISTS
WALL PLATE
(DOUBLE)
STUDS
PLATE
SUBFLOOR
HEADER JOIST
ANCHOR BOLT
SILL
FOUNDATION
(CONCRETE OR MASONRY)
FLOOR JOISTS
GIRDER
Framing
16"


36 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Structural Models.
The actual dimension of a 2×6, when cut, will shrink to
around 11
⁄2"×51
⁄2" because of the seasoning and surfacing of
the wood. Seasoning refers to the natural drying of fresh-cut
lumber, and surfacing is the smoothing of any rough edges
after cutting.
The lumber should be long enough, if possible, to run the
full length of the walls. Otherwise it can be butted end to end.
Floor joists are horizontal members of the structure, placed
on edge, that span the foundation walls. Joists run parallel to
one another and are evenly spaced between the sills. In house
building, the spacing of joists is fairly standard at 16" from the
center of one joist to the center of the next, but the spacing can
vary greatly depending on the load, or weight, the joists will be
carrying. The depth of the floor joist can vary according to the
length of the span. Floor joists should be a minimum of 2×8
and are usually 2×10. For your purposes in designing a struc-
tural model, you may assume that the joists are 2×8s spaced
16" apart, with a span of 12'.
Because the span is only 12'—not long enough to reach
the entire distance between the exterior walls—the joists will
need supports, called beams or intermediate girders. The ends
of the girders rest on the exterior walls in special pockets pro-
vided for them. The girders are themselves supported between
the exterior walls on posts. Girders can be solid blocks of tim-
ber, but more commonly they are built up from two or more
layers of 2"-thick lumber. For your purposes in modelmaking,
assume that the girders are 4×6s—that is, they are built up
from two layers of 2×6s—and are spaced 6’ apart.
Floor joists that are too short to run the entire length of the
structure must be pieced together. They are overlapped
where they cross the girder. Solid bridging, rows of diago-
nal braces, can be nailed between them for support
or installed at other points between joists to keep
them fixed and straight. A common system
of bridging uses pieces of 1×3 or 1×4
lumber set between joists as shown
in the illustration. The bridging
should be in a straight line at
a spacing of 8' or midway
between the foundation
wall and the girder as
shown in the illustration.
FLOOR JOISTS
BRIDGING
BRIDGING
POST
GIRDER
Bridging


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 37
.Structural Models
On top of the floor frame formed by the joists and headers,
common 1" boards or 5
⁄8" plywood sheets are placed to form
the subfloor. The subfloor adds rigidity to the structure and acts
as a base for the final, finished floor.
Wall frames are installed next. They support upper struc-
tures like ceilings and roofs and act as bases on which the
builder can fasten exterior and interior wall coverings. Inside
the wall frames between the coverings, there is room for other
house essentials such as electrical wiring, telephone and net-
working cables, water and gas pipes, and insulation. Ducts for
heating and air conditioning are usually laid above the ceiling
or, in a two-story building, in duct alleys constructed separately
from wall frames.
BRACING HEADER TOP PLATE (DOUBLED) STUDS HEADER
CORNER POST
ASSEMBLY CRIPPLE
STUDS
FIRE
BLOCKS
SOLE
PLATE
TRIMMER
STUDS
The top plate is a
doubled 2 x 4
(or 2 x 6 if the
wall frame is of
2 x 6 studs).
“Doubled” means
that two pieces
of lumber are
used to create a
double thickness.
Floor joists are boxed in by headers that run across the ends of
the joists. The headers are attached to the sills.
Floor frame BRIDGING GIRDER
FLOOR JOISTS
HEADER JOIST
Wall frame


38 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Structural Models.
The lowermost member of the wall frame is the sole plate,
a long piece of 2×4 lumber placed flat and nailed along the
edge of the subflooring. Studs are the upright or vertical mem-
bers of the wall frame. Studs usually are 2×4s, but 2×6s may
be used if a thicker wall is desired (usually to allow more space
for insulation). Studs are nailed to the plate. They are typically
spaced either 16" or 24" apart.
Assemblies of 2×4s or 2×6s called
posts are used at the corners of wall frames.
A basic post design uses two studs and
three spacers nailed together to form a solid
unit. When the post is for a corner, a third
stud is added as in the illustration.
Ceiling joists top wall frames. They act
as ties between opposite walls and support
the ceiling. Like floor joists, they are hori-
zontal members of the structure placed on
edge. They run parallel to each other and
are evenly spaced, usually 16" apart.
Rafters are sloping timbers that support
the roof. Rafters typically are spaced 16" to
24" apart.
Unlike floor joists,
ceiling joists
have no headers
around the edges.
Ceiling joist
STUDS
SPACERS
(ABOUT 12" LONG)
SPACERS STUDS
Outside-corner
post assembly
If 2 × 6 studs are used, the sole plate will also be of
2 × 6 lumber. Trimmer studs placed beneath door and
window headers and cripple studs beneath window
openings are essential.
RAFTERRIDGE
DISTANCE
BETWEEN
WALLS
JOIST


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 39
.Structural Models
Building to Scale
The structural model for requirement 4 is to be built to a scale
of 11
⁄2" = 1'0". At this scale, 2×6 lumber would be represented
by strips of wood 1
⁄4" thick by 3
⁄4" wide. To model a 2×4, use a
strip 1
⁄4" thick by 1
⁄2" wide. For a 2×8, use a strip 1
⁄4" thick by
1" wide.
Before beginning to build your model, prepare a supply
of miniature 2×4s, 2×6s, and 2×8s. Also prepare the other
necessary building materials to the same scale. You might need
small pieces to use for bridging, and cardboard or flat sheets
of wood stock for flooring. Although nails or screws would
be used to hold the various parts together in full-scale
construction, you may use glue in making your model.
Rafters are sloping timbers that support the roof.
Rafters typically are spaced 16" to 24" apart.
Rafters
COLLAR TIES
RAFTER RIDGE
Study the illustrations carefully to see how the subfloor,
wall, and roof structures in a wood-frame building work
together to support the building. In constructing your
model, work slowly and let the framework dry between
steps. If you rush the project, you could end up with a
messy pile of wooden sticks instead of the strongly
built, accurately scaled, and professionally constructed
model you want.





MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 41
.Process Models
Process Models
Architectural models show how buildings look. Structural mod-
els show how buildings are constructed. Process models show
how buildings work.
Engineers build process models to show on a small scale
what a building such as a manufacturing plant will look like
and how it will operate once it is constructed. Such models
demonstrate in three dimensions the placement of equipment,
pipes, and other components. Viewers can easily understand
process models because they look just like the real thing,
only smaller.
All sorts of companies use process models. They include
pharmaceutical companies that make vitamins and other medi-
cines, food companies that make and package everything from
popcorn to soda pop, and chemical companies that create inks,
dyes, and paints.
Types of Process Models
There are two types of process models: planning models and
final construction models.
Equipment can be
modeled to any
degree of detail
desired. It can be
made of wood,
cardboard or
plastic boxes,
cardboard tubes,
or any other
material that is
easily adapted to
the shape needed.
The chapter
“Materials and
Finishes” lists
some materials
useful in building
models.
Planning model


42 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Process Models.
A planning model is simple. It is usually made of
inexpensive materials and is assembled quickly. It conveys an
idea of the general location of pipes and equipment. You could
use wood, cardboard, string, blocks, foam, or any material that is
handy. The idea is to show the concept, not the details; a
preliminary planning model does not include a lot of detail.
Equipment is shown as plain blocks, and usually only large
groups of pipes are shown.
A final construction model, from which construction work-
ers actually build the full-size plant, is much more complex,
accurate, and expensive. It shows far more detail than the plan-
ning model. Equipment is modeled in exact detail and with
great accuracy. Instead of showing pipes as blocks of materials,
each pipe is shown individually.
Advantages of Models
Building a model before beginning actual construction has
many advantages. During the design stage, a model allows you
to see problems easily. For example, you might spot places
where two different things will try to take up the same space
or notice a piece of equipment that sticks out into an aisle or
hits a tank.
A tank is a tub
used to store a
liquid, a gas,
or a product.
Final construction model


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 43
.Process Models
Because a three-dimensional model shows the length, width,
and height of equipment, layouts can be more accurately
assessed. Engineers can decide the best locations for welding, for
pipe and equipment supports, for water-hose stations, for lights,
and for items such as valves. Items such as safety showers
(where operators accidentally splashed with acid can be
drenched with water) are easily placed on a model.
One primary advantage of a process model is that architects,
piping engineers, and machine designers can get together and
use the model to work out problems. All the engineers can
coordinate their work through the use of the model. When
the process model is complete, it can be used not only for
construction purposes, but also, in many cases, to train the
workers who will operate the final plant after it is constructed.
What Process Models Show
Now consider the details found in a process model.
Building Structure
After deciding the size (scale or proportion) and shape of
the model, the modeler makes the structure to enclose the
plant. The building structure can be made of wood, plastic,
cardboard, or any other suitable material. Beams and
columns are usually shown to the largest outside dimensions
or, to be more realistic, the actual shape may be shown.
The modelmaker might want to show only partial walls in
some material. This is called “dodging in” a wall, used when
the modelmaker wishes to leave access to work on the model.
With complete walls, no one could get hands or tools in to
work on the model.
Equipment Layout
Place equipment in the model in its exact location. Ensure that
it is accurately positioned and that there is enough space to
get around the equipment. A good rule is to allow a 36" (3')
minimum access around each piece of equipment.
Fire protection
can include fire
hydrants, hoses,
and sprinklers
used to put
out fires.
Structure refers
to the building
or framework
used to enclose
the process.
Remember, at a scale of 3
⁄4" = 1', which is the scale speci-
fied in the requirement, 3
⁄4" x 3 = 9
⁄4" = 21
⁄4". In other
words, you would need to leave a space of 21
⁄4" around
each piece of equipment in the model to represent the
36" minimum access required in the actual plant.


44 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Process Models.
Piping
Piping takes careful thought and planning before installation.
When many pipelines are to be shown, the modelmaker must
consider their order of placement, the size of the pipes, how
they will be supported, and how a worker would reach any
valves that might control the pipes. In positioning pipes, design-
ers and engineers must try to use the minimum number of
fittings required to get from one point to another. Unnecessary
fittings increase the cost of materials and the cost of labor
to install them.
Other things to consider are head clearances (room to walk
or pass underneath) and sloped lines. Sloped pipelines are those
that rely on gravity for drainage. In basements you will see
sloped sink and toilet drainpipes.
Heating and Ventilating
Another important feature of a process plant that can be shown
on a model is heating and ventilating equipment and ductwork.
This equipment heats and cools the building and provides good
ventilation. Ductwork is the system of tubes through which
warm or cold air travels. Equipment and ductwork must be
installed so that pipes, electrical wires, and other equipment
do not interfere with the ducts.
Instrumentation and Electrical Conduits
Most equipment needs electricity to operate. In process plants,
electrical signals from different types of instruments control
the equipment. Electrical equipment can include automatic
valves, switches, transmitters, and recording devices. Therefore,
it is important that electrical conduits and instruments be
properly installed.
HVAC stands
for heating,
ventilation, and
air-conditioning.
Pumps can be
used to force a
product through a
pipeline regard-
less of slope.
Piping is hollow tubing used to move a liquid, a gas, or a
product from one place to another. A tee is a fitting used
to branch off of a pipe to go in another direction. An
elbow is a fitting used to change the direction of a pipe.
Instrumentation is a term for automatic devices used to
operate valves, take readings, show temperatures, etc.
A valve is a device, such as a faucet in a bathroom, that
controls the flow of a liquid or gas through a pipe.


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 45
.Process Models
Building a Process Model
Now that you know what kinds of things can be shown on a
big industrial process model, you are ready to build a similar,
though simpler, model of your own. Requirement 4c asks you
to build a model showing your home’s plumbing system.
Almost everyone is familiar with a home’s water system.
Water is piped into a house; some of it is left cold and some is
heated. The water is then is distributed throughout the house.
Your model will show how this process works behind the walls
and under floors.
The illustration here depicts a flow diagram of a simple
water system you can use as a guide in building a model of the
plumbing system in your home. Your home’s plumbing might
have more attachments on the pipelines than shown in the dia-
gram. Look for all of them. If you have a question about what
you see, ask your counselor. If you have radiators in your
home, ask an adult to explain how they work.
Find out where the main shutoff valve is in your home’s water system. In
case of an emergency, such as a burst pipe, cutting off the water supply
can prevent thousands of dollars’ worth of damage.
SINK
TOILET
TUB
SINK
COLD WATER
HOT WATER
SINK
TOILET
SINK
SHOWER STALL
TO OUTSIDE
FAUCETS
WATER
METER
ENTRY
DRAIN
WATER
HEATER
TO FURNACE
(IF REQUIRED)
= VALVES
Diagram of basic plumbing system


46 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Mechanical Models.
Mechanical Models
People in a wide variety of occupations use mechanical models,
or models of mechanisms. These models are an easy-to-
understand way of presenting and communicating ideas.
Machine designers use them to find answers to complex
machine questions. Tool and die designers use them to deter-
mine the proper tooling and dies to use on machine tools.
Engineering firms use many types of models, including research
and development, automotive, and mechanical models.
In science class, you have probably learned about these six
simple machines: wheel and axle, lever, wedge, inclined plane,
screw, and pulley. Mechanical models combine two or more of
these machines to do some type of work.
A machine tool is a machine for shaping metal. A die
is a tool or form used for cutting or shaping metal or
other materials.
LEVER PULLEY INCLINED
PLANE
WHEEL
AND AXLE SCREW WEDGE


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 47
.Mechanical Models
Basic Mechanisms
Mechanical models include at least two of
the simple machines mentioned above, used
together. One of the parts, called the driver,
is stationary, or held in one place. The other
part, called the follower, moves. Sometimes
the follower moves back and forth along a
straight line. Sometimes it moves along a
curved line or a circular path. Sometimes it
moves only in part of a circle, called an arc.
The illustrations show examples of
mechanical models.
Wheel and Axle
In the wheel and axle mechanism, the piston
changes an up-and-down movement into a
circular motion. Steam enters the cylinder
and pushes on the piston and piston rod,
which can only move up and down. The
piston rod is attached to a connecting rod,
which pushes the wheel around on its axle
as the piston moves up and down. Most
steam engines and gasoline engines work
on this principle.
STEAM ENTERS
CYLINDER
PISTON
MOVES UP
AND DOWN
PISTON ROD
MOVES UP
AND DOWN
CONNECTING ROD
PUSHES WHEEL
AROUND
WHEEL
ROTATES
AROUND
ITS AXLE
Steam engine
The piston’s up-and-down movement
is changed into circular motion.


48 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Mechanical Models.
LOCKING PLIER
Tools that use four-bar linkages
Four-Bar Linkage
The four-bar linkage is the simplest form of movable linkage.
It consists of four rigid bars or links, which are connected by
joints or pivots. One link is usually fixed (it does not move)
and is called the frame or ground link. Connected to this link
are the two grounded links. One of these is the input link,
which receives the external force; the other is the follower
link, whose motion is determined by the motion of
the input link.
A four-bar linkage drives the motion of windshield wipers.
Locking pliers are an example of four-bar linkage with the fixed
link made adjustable by turning the end screw.
COUPLER
CRANK
(DRIVER)
ROCKER (FOLLOWER)
This four-bar mechanism has
a crank (the input link) that
rotates in a complete circle
and moves the follower link
(the rocker) back and forth.
Four-bar linkage—the
linkage of the four bars
converts up-and-down
motion into left-and-right
motion.
PORTABLE TOGGLE CLAMP
GROUND


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 49
.Mechanical Models
Straight-Line Mechanisms
A straight-line mechanism causes a point to travel in a straight
or nearly straight line. In the late 18th and early 19th centuries,
a big problem facing engineers was how to make the piston rod
in a steam-powered machine go straight. In 1784, James Watt,
the inventor of the steam engine, came up with a workable
solution. He used three rods connected as shown in the illustra-
tion; the midpoint P of the middle link travels in a straight line
up and down when the other links swing on their pivots. Some
say that Watt was prouder of this invention than of the steam
engine that made him famous.
In 1850, a mathematician named Tchebycheff devised
another solution to the problem of straight-line motion that may
have been more accurate than Watt’s but wasn’t as practical.
An Englishman named Roberts proposed yet another solution
for a mechanism that traces a nearly straight line. These are
shown in the illustrations.
Straight-line mechanisms
(a) Scott-Russell (b) and (c) Variations of Scott-Russell
(d) Watt’s (e) Roberts’ (f) Tchebycheff’s
To see these mechanisms in motion (which makes the whole idea
much clearer), check out (with your parent’s permission) the website
www.brockeng.com/mechanism. Click on each of the mechanisms shown
above and study their movements. Do you see the straight lines they trace?
= fixed pivot= point traveling in straight line


50 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Mechanical Models.
Cams
Cam mechanisms provide a simple means of getting unusual or
irregular motions that would be difficult, if not impossible, to
obtain with other types of mechanizing. Cams with irregular or
unusual shapes can be used to achieve a desired motion. In
other cases a simple round or oval wheel mounted so that it
revolves off-center will guide the follower in the desired motion.
Cams are the heart of such automatic devices as auto-
matic machine tools. They are also found in all internal-
combustion engines.
The cam is any guiding surface, and the follower
usually is a small wheel that is either lifted or guided
by the cam surface.
Examples of cams
The rods move up and down as
the cams revolve.
PIVOT
LEVER


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 51
.Mechanical Models
Gears
Gears are toothed wheels used to accurately transmit circular
motion from one part to another. The teeth keep the two gears
locked together so that they operate smoothly without slipping.
To make two gears rotate without slipping but without touch-
ing, the modelmaker or
engineer uses a chain to
connect the two gears.
A bicycle chain is a
perfect example of
this arrangement.
Building a Mechanical Model
Mechanical models are used in the first stages of design to
ensure that a design will do what it is supposed to do. A flat, or
two-dimensional, breadboard model is a very simple, easy-to-
make type of mechanical model. You can cut its pieces out of
cardboard, poster board, or paper and fasten them to a backing
board with thumbtacks. The pieces can move or be fixed in
place. Because the materials used are rather flimsy, this type of
model has limited usefulness.
A prototype model is the first working model of a design; it
is usually three-dimensional and full scale. It can be made of
wood, plastic, metal, or another material. Design information
gained from such models can be of real value.
When choosing a mechanical model to build, you might
consider making a model of a two-wheel bicycle chain drive, a
medieval catapult, or a big model of the squirting mechanism
on a bottle of window cleaner. (Maybe you could even make it
squirt water.) Use your imagination.
When referring to
a chain drive, the
designer or engi-
neer uses the
term sprocket
instead of gear.
Before you start
making your
model, be sure
to discuss your
ideas with
your counselor.
One gear turns in one
direction, the other gear
in the opposite direction.
The large gear on the left
will turn more slowly than
the small gear on the right.
Sprockets





MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 53
.Industrial Models
Industrial Models
Almost all products—cars, airplanes, toys, furniture—begin as
models. As you have learned, models are used to demonstrate
how something works or looks before it is manufactured or
built. You may complete requirement 4 by building a model of
a passenger-carrying vehicle. Be sure to get your counselor’s
approval before you begin.
Plans, Materials, and Tools
Several materials, including wood, clay, plastic, and cardboard,
are suitable for building industrial models. Polystyrene foam or
foam core are good choices for a car. They are inexpensive, easy
to work with, and can be found at most hobby and art-supply
shops. If you use foam, you will also need a water-soluble white
glue (not plastic model cement), spackling paste (commonly
used for patching cracks in plaster walls), a sharp knife,
sandpaper, and paint.
Before you start, you must select a design—a two-door car
or an SUV, for example. Then draw your design. Start your
drawing with a side view to a scale of 1" = 1'0". Your drawing
should include overall dimensions and important reference
points. Working from front to back, these might include the
distance from the ground to the bumper, the length of the
hood, the distance from the ground to the roof, and so on.
The drawing also should include front and rear views.
When you have
completed your
drawing, show it
to your counselor.
Discuss any
questions and
review the next
steps. With your
counselor’s
approval, you
are ready to
start building
the model.


54 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Industrial Models.
Top View
Rear View Front View
Side View
DOOR FENDER
CONTOUR TRUNK
CONTOUR
CARVED BODY
FROM STYROFOAM
CHASSIS EXHAUSTS (4)DRAW SPOKED WHEELS ON WHITE
CARD AND CEMENT TO WHEEL
WINDSHIELD REAR LIGHTS
AXLELICENSE PLATE
LOCATION
TRUNK LID WHEELS
AIR SCOOP ENGINE HATCH
HEADLIGHT
CHASSISTWIN WIRE
GRILLE
AIR SCOOPENGINE HATCHSTEERING WHEELHUBCAPS
GRILLEWINDSHIELDSEATSTRUNK LID


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 55
.Industrial Models
Making the Model
Transfer the outline of the side view
from your drawing to the foam. This is
best done by making a paper pattern and tracing
around it. If the foam is 1" thick, you will need five or six
layers, depending on the overall width of the car. Each layer
will be identical except for wheel openings in the outside
layers. Cut out all of the layers and glue them together with
white glue. Let them dry for several hours.
When the glue has dried, you can carve the block. This
step is intended to give the model its basic form, not its detail.
An ordinary kitchen knife and a hacksaw blade make perfect
carving tools.
After you have finished carving the shape, spread a layer
of spackling paste over the foam. This will take several hours to
dry, so set the model aside until the next day.
When the paste is thoroughly dry, lightly sand the model
with fine sandpaper. Then, use a pointed tool and a fine file or
piece of sandpaper to shape the details of the model. Scribe the
outlines of window frames and windows, doors, hood, trunk
lid, headlights, taillights, and so forth.
Make wheels and tires from disks of
wood. Glue the disks into the wheel open-
ings. For a more realistic effect, mount the
wheels on axles of coat-hanger wire or a
similar material so that the car will roll.
Paint Your Model
When the base coats are completely dry, you
can add details such as racing stripes and
chrome rims. Use a pointed fine-bristled brush for painting
stripes, body side molding, numbers, and other delicate features.
Do not use plastic
model cement
on foam. The
foam will melt
and the layers
will not bond.
Wheels made
of wood disks
mounted on
axles cut from
a coat hanger
Transfer the outline of the side view to 1"-thick
Styrofoam. Cut out five or six layers,
depending on the overall width of the car.
Each layer will be identical except
for wheel openings in the outside
layers. Glue the layers together.
For your model,
use 1"-thick
plastic foam.





MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 57
.Mission: Fantasy Spacecraft
Thousands of hobbyists create models using kits that provide the
design, parts, and accessories. All the hobbyist has to do is fol-
low the instructions. For those who want to go a step beyond
kits, there is kit-bashing—a more creative approach that uses
parts from two or more kits to create an original design and
model. Most kit-bashing projects use leftover parts from several
kits, allowing you to use your imagination while taking advan-
tage of the convenience of premade parts.
To complete requirement 5, you may choose to design your
fantasy spacecraft or handheld prop using ordinary household
items. This could be a spacecraft, as seen in the Star Wars mov-
ies, or a handheld prop like the communicators in Star Trek. The
scope and detail of this project is up to you, using some general
guidelines. The project should reflect what you have learned
about designs and models so far—and your imagination.
If you kit-bash
your spaceship,
you will be
following a
grand tradition.
For example, the
Millennium Falcon
model used in
Star Wars Episode
IV: A New Hope
relied heavily on
parts from off-the-
shelf models.
The most difficult part of your project may be coming
up with a design idea. Give yourself plenty of time to
think of what your spacecraft will look like and what
materials you could use. You will make your own
instructions as you go along, so organization will be key.
Mission: Fantasy Spacecraft
or Handheld Prop


58 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Mission: Fantasy Spacecraft.
To get started, study different designs of aircraft, ships,
submarines, or digital devices, tools, and cellphones. Your local
library and the internet will have plenty of resources. (Only use
the internet with your parent’s permission.)
You might also visit an interior-design studio or store and
research different surfaces and materials. Or you might get
some free samples to use in your model, and visit a hardware
store to research various storage compartments. You could
watch television programs about space exploration to find out
about components on existing spacecraft. You might also
request information from NASA through its website
or through the mail.
When you are ready to begin, first determine the model’s
scale based on the materials you have. You will want the model
to look as real as possible—it is to be used in a movie
production, or at least that is the idea. A handheld prop will
need to look like it could work, with buttons, dials or a screen
that is believable. List the tools you will need. Cut pictures or
shapes out of catalogs, newspapers, or magazines to use as
details on the spacecraft.
Look around
your home
for interesting
materials to use.
Also gather
leftover pieces
from other models
you have made
in the past.


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 59
.Mission: Fantasy Spacecraft
Now, using what you have learned in this pamphlet, begin
creating your design. Make detailed drawings of the model,
remembering your scale at all times. Think of how the model
will look from different angles. Make sure all the parts fit
together. There should not be any gaps between pieces.
Once you complete your model, write a short, straightfor-
ward essay explaining why you chose your particular design
and how you engineered it. Describe the scale and materials
used, and your reasons for choosing them. Also mention what
you learned from the project, what challenges you encountered,
and how you overcame them.
Make your
model look
more authentic.
Add nurnies and
greebles. Nurnies
are features like
extra vents or
scopes that add
complexity but
have no real
purpose. Greebles
are details like
boxes and ridges
that break up the
surface of a
fictional
spacecraft.
Part of being a Scout is adapting what you have
learned and using it in everyday life.


60 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Modelmaking As a Career.
Modelmaking As
a Career
A wide variety of businesses have industrial modelmaking needs.
In the movie industry, for example, designers use modelmaking
skills to create sets and special effects. Architectural and graphic
design firms also use models. Models have long been important
in the automobile manufacturing industry.
Computer modeling and animation is a fast-growing career
field. Computers make it possible to “build” and display
intricate models on-screen. Although such models have no
physical form, they can be studied and manipulated on
computer monitors in three dimensions much like scale models.
Today these digital models can be realized in three
dimensions with 3D printers, laser cutters and CNC machining.
These ways of making models are used extensively by
professional modelmakers today. The resources section of this
pamphlet lists several colleges and vocational schools that offer
programs in modelmaking, modeling technology, or industrial
design technology. Your merit badge counselor, teacher, or school
counselor can also help you find information about additional
training opportunities.
Computer models
may replace scale
models for some
design purposes,
but there will
always be
a demand
for detailed,
three-dimensional
models.
Professional modelmaker Steve Howarth adds surface detailing to
this satellite for the movie AVP: Alien vs. Predator.


MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 61
.Modelmaking As a Career
Business Areas and How Models Are Used
Automobile industry: Styling, prototypes and concept cars;
wind-resistance testing, safety design
Toy industry: Development and sales
Chemical and petroleum industries: Exhibition models,
offshore drilling rigs, ship design, dry materials handling
Office equipment manufacturing: Design, sales, human
factors engineering, ergonomics
Film and theater industry: Stage sets, robots, spaceships, cities,
planets, makeup, special effects
Machine tool industry: Movement and force studies
Building and construction (architectural/structural) industries:
Buildings and houses, office layouts, site studies, urban planning,
site reconstruction, and historical landscape effects
Environmental and civil engineering: Topography studies, pollution
studies, river flows, dams, spillways
Sales: Exhibition models, backdrops, booths at conventions
Law: Crime scene and accident re-creations, patent disputes
Museum and park industries: Caves, physics demonstrations,
historical rooms, artifacts, planetary systems, historical sites
Aeronautics: Wind-resistance studies, destructive testing, displays
Energy industries: Coal handling, solar-energy systems
Amusement parks: Theming, rides, park layouts
Undersea and naval industries: Water-resistance studies, internal
piping layouts, human environments, harbor studies
Medicine and science: Medical prosthetics, human and animal anatomy,
molecular structure





MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING 63
.Model Design and Building Resources
Scouting Literature
Architecture, Art, Auto Mechanics, Aviation,
Engineering, Railroading, Robotics, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bridgewater, Alan, and Gill Bridgewater.
Making More Wooden Mechanical
Models. Popular Woodworking
Books, 1999.
———. Making Wooden Mechanical
Models. Popular Woodworking
Books, 1995.
Congdon, Roark T. Architectural Model
Building: Tools, Techniques, and
Materials. Fairchild Books, 2010.
Covert, Pat. Building and Detailing Scale
Model Cars. Specialty Press, 2006.
FineScale Modeler. Scale Model Detailing:
Projects You Can Do. Kalmbach
Publishing, 1995.
Hansen, Lawrence. The Basics of Scale
Modeling. Kalmbach Publishing, 2005.
Leaf, Edwin B. Ship Modeling From
Scratch. McGraw-Hill, 1994.Levy,
Raymond. Making Mechanical
Marvels in Wood. Sterling, 1991.
Marmo, Richard. How to Build
Sci-Fi Model Spacecraft.
Specialty Press, 2004.
Naval Education and Training
Program Development Center.
Basic Machines and How
They Work. BN Publishing, 2008.
Salvadori, Mario G. The Art of
Construction: Projects and Principles
for Beginning Engineers and Architects.
Chicago Review Press, 2000.
Werner, Megan. Model Making.
Princeton Architectural Press, 2011.
Wilson, Jeff. Modeler’s Guide to Realistic
Painting and Finishing. Kalmbach
Publishing, 2006.
Magazines
FineScale Modeler
Toll-free telephone: 877-246-4847
www.finescale.com
Model Airplane News
www.modelairplanenews.com
Model Design and
Building Resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


64 MODEL DESIGN AND BUILDING
Model Design and Building Resources.
Organizations and Websites
Academy of Model Aeronautics
Toll-free telephone: 800-435-9262
www.modelaircraft.org
Association of Professional
Model Makers
Telephone: 315-750-0803
Email: info@modelmakers.org
www.modelmakers.org
International Plastic Modelers’
Society USA
Website: www.ipmsusa.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Jim
Dore, AMS Phoenix Company, El Cajon,
Calif., for his technical expertise and his
role in revising the 2003 edition of
Model Design and Building, upon which
this edition is based.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
HKS Inc., courtesy—pages 41 and 42
Steve Howarth/www.modelminiatures.
co.uk, courtesy—page 60
Wikipedia.org/Tobias Grosch, courtesy
page 24 (model city)
Wikipedia.org/Glenn McKechnie,
courtesy page 16 (scriber)
Wikipedia.org/Arthur Spicer
(layout creator)/Eric Guinther
(photographer), courtesy—page 24
(model town with railroad)
Wikipedia.org/Marcus Wong, courtesy
page 47 (steam engine)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Scouting
America.
Daniel Giles—page 12 (Scout)
John McDearmon—pages 20 (both),
21 (1/4" = 1'0" scale), 22 (all),
29-30 (all), 32-33 (all), 35–39
(all), 45–51 (all illustrations),
and 54–55 (all)
The Association of Professional
Model Makers maintains a
complete list of colleges and
universities that offer model-
making-related programs. With
your parent's permission, visit
www.modelmakers.org and search
for “colleges & universities list.”