SEARCH
AND
RESCUE

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

SEARCH AND RESCUE

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Do the following:
		a.

 xplain to your counselor the hazards you are most
E
likely to encounter while participating in search and
rescue (SAR) activities, and what you should do to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to
these hazards.

		 b.	Discuss first aid and prevention for the types of injuries
or illnesses that could occur while participating in SAR
activities, including: snakebites, dehydration, shock,
environmental emergencies such as hypothermia or
heatstroke, blisters, and ankle and knee sprains.
2. Demonstrate knowledge to stay found and prevent yourself
from becoming the subject of a SAR mission.
		 a.	How does the buddy system help in staying found
and safe?
		 b.	How can knowledge of the area and its seasonal
weather changes affect your plans?
		 c.	Explain how the Ten Essentials are similar to a
“ready pack.”
3. Discuss the following with your counselor:
		 a.

The difference between search and rescue

		 b.	The difference between PLS (place last seen) and
LKP (last known point)
		 c.	The meaning of these terms:
(1)  AFRCC (Air Force Rescue Coordination Center)
(2)  IAP (Incident Action Plan)
(3)  ICS (Incident Command System)
(4)  Evaluating search urgency
(5)  Establishing confinement
(6)  Scent item
(7)  Area air scent dog
(8)  Briefing and debriefing
34016
ISBN 978-0-8395-0014-8
©2012 Boy Scouts of America
2014 Printing

4. Find out who in your area has authority for search and
rescue and what their responsibilities are. Discuss this with
your counselor, and explain the official duties of a search
and rescue team.
5. Working with your counselor, become familiar with the
Incident Command System. You may use any combination
of resource materials, such as printed or online. With your
counselor, discuss the features of the ICS and how they
compare with Scouting’s patrol method.
6. Identify four types of search and rescue teams and discuss
their use or role with your counselor. Then do the following:
		 a.	Interview a member of one of the teams you have
identified above, and learn how this team contributes
to a search and rescue operation. Discuss what you
learned with your counselor.

To complete
requirement 5,
you may need to
go online (with
your parent’s
permission). See
the resources
section for
more information.

		 b.	Describe the process and safety methods of working
around at least two of the specialized SAR teams you
identified above.
		 c.	Explain the differences between wilderness, urban,
and water SARs.
A Note About Unauthorized and Restricted Activities
The BSA’s Guide to Safe Scouting states under “Unauthorized
and Restricted Activities” that flying in aircraft as part of a
search and rescue mission is an unauthorized activity for
youth members. For complete information, see http://www.
scouting.org/scoutsource/HealthandSafety.aspx.
7.	Discuss the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) system,
latitude, and longitude. Then do the following:
		 a.	Using a 1:24,000 scale USGS topographic map, show
that you can identify a location of your choice using
UTM coordinates.
		 b.	Using a 1:24,000 scale map, ask your counselor to
give you a UTM coordinate on the map, then identify
that location.

SEARCH AND RESCUE    3

		 c.	Show that you can identify your current location using
the UTM coordinates on a Global Positioning System
(GPS) unit and verify it on a 1:24,000 scale map.
		 d.	Determine a hypothetical place last seen, and point out
an area on your map that could be used for containment
using natural or human-made boundaries.
8. Choose a hypothetical scenario, either one presented in this
merit badge pamphlet or one created by your counselor.
Then do the following:
		 a.	Complete an incident objectives form for this scenario.
		 b.	Complete an Incident Action Plan (IAP) to address
this scenario.
		 c.	Discuss with your counselor the behavior of a lost
person and how that would impact your incident
action plan (for example, the differences between
searching for a young child versus a teen).
		 d.	After completing 8a–8c, discuss the hypothetical
scenario with your counselor.
9. Discuss with your counselor the terms hasty team and
hasty search. Then do the following:
		 a.	Plan and carry out a practice hasty search—either
urban or wilderness—for your patrol or troop. Include
the following elements in the search: clue awareness,
evidence preservation, tracking the subject, and
locating the subject using attraction or trail sweep.
		 a.	When it’s over, hold a team debriefing to discuss
the hasty search. Discuss problems encountered,
successful and unsuccessful tactics, and ideas
for improvement.
10. Find out about three career or volunteer opportunities in
search and rescue. Pick one and find out the education,
training, and experience required for this professional or
volunteer position. Discuss this with your counselor, and
explain why this position might interest you.

4    SEARCH AND RESCUE

.Search and Rescue Resources

Search and Rescue Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook;
Backpacking, Climbing, Emergency
Preparedness, Fire Safety, First Aid,
Geocaching, Hiking, Lifesaving,
Motorboating, Orienteering, Radio,
Rowing, Safety, Scuba Diving,
Small-Boat Sailing, Swimming,
Weather, Whitewater, and Wilderness
Survival merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with your
parent’s permission) at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
Cook, Mike, Guy Kerr, Rick LaValla, et. al.
Urban Search Management for the
Initial Response Incident Commander.
ERI Canada Inc. and ERI International
Inc., 2004.
Eng, Ronald C., ed. Mountaineering:
The Freedom of the Hills. The
Mountaineers Books, 2010.
King, Rick, and Chuck White, eds.
Mountain Travel and Rescue Manual.
The Mountaineers Books, 2012.

Kjellstrom, Bjorn, and Carina Kjellstrom
Elgin. Be an Expert with Map and
Compass: The Complete Orienteering
Handbook. John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
LaValla, Richard, Patrick Hood, Ricj
Lawson, Norm Kerr, and Guy Smith.
Basic Search and Rescue Skills:
A Practitioner’s Guide to Search
and Rescue. ERI Canada Inc., 2007.
Letham, Lawrence, and Alex Lethham.
GPS Made Easy: Using Global
Positioning Systems in the Outdoors.
The Mountaineers Books, 2008.
NASAR. Fundamentals of Search
and Rescue. Jones and Bartlett
Publishers, 2005.
NASAR, Introduction to Search and
Rescue. National Association for
Search and Rescue, 2008.
Setnicka, Tim J. Wilderness Search
and Rescue, 1981.

Online Resources
ICS Forms
Website: http://www.fema.gov/
emergency/nims/JobAids.shtm
National SAR Plan
Website: http://www.uscg.mil/hq/
cg5/cg534/manuals/Natl_SAR_
Plan(2007).pdf
SEARCH AND RESCUE    91

Search and Rescue Resources.

New Mexico SAR Field Certification
Study Guide
Website: http://nmsarc.org/resources/
FieldCert_docs/StudyGuide.pdf
Search Urgency Chart
Website: www.eri-online.com/uploads/
MLSO_Search_Urgency_Chart.pdf.
“Suunto on How Not to Rely on Luck
& Compass and Map”
Website: http://www.crew572.org/
resources/map_and_compass/
Suunto.pdf
Urgency Determination Worksheet
Website: www.k7rdg.org/ICSforms
Wilderness Survival Guide
Website: http://www.wildernesssurvival-skills.com/
A Note About Unauthorized and
Restricted Activities
The BSA’s Guide to Safe Scouting states
under “Unauthorized and Restricted
Activities” that flying in aircraft as
part of a search and rescue mission
is an unauthorized activity for youth
members. For complete information,
see http://www.scouting.org/scoutsource/HealthandSafety.aspx.

Organizations and Websites
Air Force Rescue Coordination Center
Website: http://www.1af.acc.af.mil/
units/afrcc/
American Avalanche Association
Website: http://www.americanavalancheassociation.org
American Institute for Avalanche
Research and Education
Website: http://avtraining.org

92    SEARCH AND RESCUE

American Medical Response Reach
and Treat Team
Website: http://www.summitpost.org/
amr-reach-and-treat-who-we-are-andwhat-we-do/172226
American Mountain Guides
Association
Website: www.amga.com
Colorado Geological Survey
Website: http://avalanche.state.co.us
Federal Emergency
Management Agency
Telephone: 202-566-1600
Toll-free telephone for literature requests
only: 800-480-2520
Inland SAR School
Website: http://www.uscg.mil/tcyorktown/ops/sar/inland/default.asp
Mountain Rescue Association
Website: www.mra.org
National Association for
Search and Rescue (NASAR)
P.O. Box 232020
Centreville, VA 20120-2020
Website: http://www.nasar.org/
National SAR School
Website: http://www.uscg.mil/
tcyorktown/ops/sar/default.asp
National Ski Patrol
Website: http://www.nsp.org
New Hampshire Fish and Game
Department Specialized Search
and Rescue Team
Website: http://www.wildlife.state.
nh.us/Law_Enforcement/sar.htm
New Hampshire Outdoor Council
Website: www.nhoutdoorcouncil.org

.Search and Rescue Resources

New Mexico Department of
Public Safety, Search and Rescue
Resource Office
P.O. Box 1628
Santa Fe, NM 87504-1628
Website: http://www.dps.nm.org/
index.php/search-rescue/
New Mexico Search and
Rescue Council
P.O. Box 3396
Albuquerque, NM 87190-3396
Website: http://nmsarc.org/
resources/certification.html
Urban Search and Rescue
Website: http://www.fema.gov/
emergency/usr
U.S. Air Force Pararescuemen
Website: www.pararescue.com
U.S. Coast Guard
Website: http://www.uscg.mil
U.S. Geological Survey
Website: http://topomaps.usgs.gov

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks the
following members of the Search and
Rescue Merit Badge Development
Team, who diligently worked to
develop the requirements and content
for this new merit badge.
Doug Palmer, chairman—retired, associate director of Program, Philmont
Scout Ranch; New Mexico Certified
Type II field co-coordinator/Incident
Commander
Mark Anderson—Eagle Scout; director
of Program, Philmont Scout Ranch;
field coordinator, New Mexico State
Police Search and Rescue
Mary Berry, D.V.M.—founder, Sandia
Search Dogs, certified trainer, Search
and Rescue dogs in trailing, area
air scent, cadaver, and FEMA
disaster dogs

SEARCH AND RESCUE    93

