DOG CARE

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

DOG CARE

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Do the following:
a. Briefly discuss the historical origin and domestication
of the dog.
b. Describe some common characteristics of the dogs that
make up each of the seven major dog groups.
c. Tell some specific characteristics of seven breeds of
dogs (one from each major group), OR give a short
history of one breed.
2. Point out on a dog or a sketch at least 10 body parts. Give
the correct name of each one.
3. Do the following:
a. Explain the importance of house-training, obedience
training, and socialization training for your dog.
b. Explain what “responsible pet ownership” means.
c. Explain what issues (including temperament) must be
considered when deciding on what breed of dog to get
as a family pet.
4. For two months, keep and care for your dog.* Maintain a
log of your activities during this period that includes these
items: feeding schedule, types of food used, amount fed,
exercise periods, training schedule, a weekly body weight
record, grooming and bathing schedules, veterinary care, if
necessary, and costs. Also include a brief description of the
type of housing/shelter arrangements you have for your dog.
5. Explain the correct way to obedience train a dog and
what equipment you would need. Show with your dog
*The activities used to fulfill the requirements for the Dog Care merit badge
may not be used to help fulfill requirements for other merit badges.
35884
ISBN 978-0-8395-3289-7
©2016 Boy Scouts of America
2016 Printing

any three of these commands: “come,” “sit,” “down,”
“heel,” “stay,” “fetch” or “get it,” and “drop it.”
6. Do the following:
a. Discuss the proper vaccination schedule for a dog in
your area from puppyhood through adulthood.
b. Discuss the control methods for preventing fleas, ticks,
heartworms, and intestinal parasites (worms) for a dog
in your area from puppyhood through adulthood.
c. Explain the importance of dental care and tooth
brushing to your pet’s health.
d. Discuss the benefits of grooming your dog’s coat and
nails on a regular basis.
e. Discuss with your counselor any seasonal conditions
(like hot summers, cold winters, or extreme humidity)
where you live that need to be considered for your dog.
f. Discuss with your counselor the considerations and
advantages of spaying or neutering your dog.
7. Do the following:
a. Explain precautions to take in handling a hurt dog.
b. Show how to put on an emergency muzzle.
c. Explain how to treat wounds. Explain first aid for a
dog bite.
d. Show how to put on a simple dressing and bandage
the foot, body, or head of your dog.
e. Explain what to do if a dog is hit by a car.
f. List the things needed in every dog owner’s first-aid kit.
g. Tell the dangers of home treatment of a serious ailment.
h. Briefly discuss the cause and method of spread, the
signs and symptoms and the methods of prevention of
rabies, parvovirus, distemper, and heartworms in dogs.
8. Visit a veterinary hospital or an animal shelter and give a
report about your visit to your counselor.
9. Know the laws and ordinances involving dogs that are in
force in your community.
10. Learn about three career opportunities for working with
dogs. Pick one and find out about the education, training,
and experience required for this career, and discuss this
with your counselor. Tell why this profession interests you.
DOG CARE    3

Dog Care Resources.

Dog Care Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Journal; Animal Science,
Bird Study, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Horsemanship,
Mammal Study, Pets, Reptile and
Amphibian Study, and Veterinary
Medicine merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with
your parent’s permission)
at http://www.scoutstuff.org for
a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other
helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.

Books
The American Kennel Club. The
Complete Dog Book 19th Edition
Revised. John Wiley, 1997.
Burnford, Sheila. The Incredible
Journey. Lareleaf, 1996.
Coppinger, Raymond, and Lorna
Coppinger. Dogs. Scribner, 2001.
Fogle, Bruce. The New Encyclopedia of
the Dog. DK Publishing, 2000.
Hausman, Gerald, and Loretta
Hausman. The Mythology of Dogs.
St. Martin’s, 1998.
78    DOG CARE

Kjelgaard, Jim. Snow Dog. Bantam
Skylark, 1983.
London, Jack. The Call of the Wild.
Prentice Hall, 1995.
Mammato, Bobbie. Pet First Aid: Cats
and Dogs. American National Red
Cross and the Humane Society of
the United States, 1997.
Serpell, James, editor. The Domestic Dog.
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Sheldon, Jennifer W. Wild Dogs: The
Natural History of the Nondomestic
Canidae. Academic Press, 1997.
Terhune, Albert Payson. Best Loved Dog
Stories of Albert Payson Terhune.
Amerson, 1987.
Thurston, Mary Elizabeth. The Lost
History of the Canine Race.
Avon, 1997.
Wells, Rosemary. Lassie Come-Home.
Henry Holt, 1998.
Zink, M. Christine. Dog Health &
Nutrition for Dummies. John
Wiley, 2001.

Periodicals
AKC Family Dog
Telephone: 212-696-8200
Website: http://www.akc.org/pubs/
familydog

.Dog Care Resources

Dog Fancy
Website: http://www.dogchannel.com/
dfdc_portal.aspx
Dog World
Website: http://www.dogchannel.com/
dog-magazines/dogworld

Organizations and Websites
American Humane
63 Inverness Drive East
Englewood, CO 80112
Telephone: 303-792-9900
Website:
http://www.americanhumane.org
The American Kennel Club
Telephone: 212-696-8200
Website: http://www.akc.org
American Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals
424 East 92nd St.
New York, NY 10128-6804
Telephone: 212-876-7700
Website: http://www.aspca.org
Dog Breed Info Center
Website: http://www.dogbreedinfo.com
Dog Owner’s Guide
Website: http://www.canismajor.com/dog
Dogpark.com
Website: http://www.dogpark.com
The Humane Society of the
United States
2100 L St., NW
Washington, DC 20037
Telephone: 202-452-1100
Website: http://www.hsus.org

SPAY/USA
25 Davis Ave.
Port Washington, NY 11050
Toll-free telephone: 800-248-7729
Website: http://www.spayusa.org
“Woof! It’s a Dog’s Life”
Website: http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/woof

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks Rob
Hilsenroth, D.V.M., for providing his
time and expertise to this new edition
of the Dog Care merit badge pamphlet.
Dr. Hilsenroth serves as executive director of the Morris Animal Foundation in
Englewood, Colorado. The Foundation
helps fund humane animal health
studies that are conducted at veterinary
institutions worldwide.
Thanks also to Merit Badge
Maintenance Task Force member Steve
Bowen, D.V.M., for taking a special
interest in this updated edition and
providing his time and expertise to
help make the pamphlet fun, appealing,
and enriching to Boy Scouts. Dr. Bowen
is a practicing veterinarian in
El Centro, California.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.

The Kennel Club
Website: http://www.thekennelclub.org.uk
Pet of the Day
Website: http://www.petoftheday.com

DOG CARE    79

