DOG CARE


DOG CARE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Dog-Care or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35884
ISBN 978-0-8395-3289-7
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
FPO


DOG CARE 3





DOG CARE 5
Contents
A Scout’s Best Friend. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Dog Breeds and Characteristics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Getting to Know Your Dog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Being a Responsible Dog Owner . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Grooming Your Dog . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Keeping Your Dog Healthy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Dog Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
A Scout’s Best Ol’ Friend . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Careers Working With Dogs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Dog Care Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78
Appendix: XXXX . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 80





DOG CARE 7
.A Scout’s Best Friend
A Scout’s Best Friend
The love and interdependence between humans and dogs
has endured for thousands of years. Evidence suggests that
dogs and humans started relying on each other thousands of
years ago. Today, dogs are our coworkers and companions.
They assist search-and-rescue teams, law enforcement officers,
hunters, farmers, and people with disabilities. They also play
with us and keep us company.
Evolution of the Dog
Although there are hundreds of breeds that look very different
from each other, all dogs are members of the same species,
Canis familiaris.
Scientists believe that domesticated
dogs descended from the wolf.
Scientists believe that today’s
dogs owe their existence
to wolves tamed long ago.
The wolf is the ancestor of
the modern domestic dog;
in fact, they are almost
genetically identical. Wolves
can breed with dogs and
produce normal pups.


8 DOG CARE
A Scout’s Best Friend.
The origin of dogs can be traced to an animal called
Miacis, which looked more like a weasel than a dog. This
small, flesh-eating creature had short legs, a long tail, five toes,
and teeth like those of today’s carnivores. The next important
ancestor, called Cynodictis was the first to have doglike
characteristics, such as a shortened fifth toe, 42 teeth, and
longer legs for running. Then came a descendent of Cynodictis,
called Tomarctus, which resembled today’s dogs even more.
This animal had short, erect ears, long legs and tail, and a
dewclaw that had developed from the shortened fifth toe. Also,
Tomarctus probably behaved much like today’s dogs do.
All breeds of dogs and wolves evolved from Tomarctus.
Scientists group them in a family called Canidae. Today,
some scientists believe dogs may have evolved from the
foxlike Leptocyon.
Domestication
Dogs probably were the first animals to be domesticated.
Evidence left in the camps and burial mounds of early
humans show that people kept dogs as hunters, trackers, and
watchdogs. Later, as humans began to raise sheep, cattle, and
other livestock, their dogs learned to herd the flocks and watch
over them. In temples and tombs of ancient civilizations,
drawings and inscriptions show that the ancient Egyptians
kept short-legged house dogs and tall spotted dogs that looked
like Greyhounds. The Saluki also was kept; it is the oldest
recognized breed. The Assyrians used a powerful Mastiff type
of dog for hunting.
Many toy breeds originated in China. Asians brought
them to Europe in the fourth century, which resulted in today’s
curly-coated European breeds.
The earliest dogs probably resembled the present-day
dingo, the wild dog of Australia.


DOG CARE 9
.A Scout’s Best Friend
When the first European explorers arrived in the Americas,
they discovered that American Indians had domesticated dogs
to serve as watchdogs, pets, and beasts of burden.
By the 1700s, breeds in Europe were being refined for
hunting, retrieving, and companionship. The first dog show,
held in England in 1859, proved that people had started
to appreciate different breeds of dogs for their unique
characteristics. Today, only an expert could recognize all the
breeds of dogs.
We know humans have long respected the strength
and power of dogs because they often appear as gods
or mythological creatures in early art. For example,
the Egyptian god of death had the head of a dog.
In Greek mythology, a ferocious three-headed
dog named Cerebus guarded the entrance to
the underworld.





DOG CARE 11
.Dog Breeds and Characteristics
Dog Breeds and
Characteristics
The wide range of shape, size, color, and personality of
purebred dogs is the result of controlled breeding and
selection. Some dogs were bred to hunt, some to serve as
guard or sled dogs, and some to be herders. Others were
kept as pets, companions, and guides.
In the late 1800s, at the same time that dog shows were
gaining popularity, a system was developed for classifying
breeds according to how they are used. In the United States,
the American Kennel Club has maintained a registry of breeds
since 1884. Recognized groups are sporting dogs, hounds,
working dogs, terriers, toys, nonsporting dogs, and herding
dogs. Within these seven groups, the AKC recognizes 202
breeds (as of 2022, with new breeds being recognized every
year). See Appendix on page 80 for a complete list of breeds
and the year they were recognized.
A purebred dog has a “traceable” family line. Its father
(sire) and mother (dam) are of the same breed and are
registered. A purebred dog can trace its ancestry back to
the time its breed was established. Mixed-breed dogs are
not eligible for registry. Nevertheless, for many owners a
mixed-breed dog makes a wonderful pet.
To create breeds, dog owners intentionally mate
purebred dogs and certify and register the pups.
In the United States, the number of dogs—purebred
and mixed breed—is estimated at 90 million.


12 DOG CARE
Dog Breeds and Characteristics.
The groups, and many of the breeds within these groups,
recognized by the AKC are as follows.
SPORTING DOGS
These are dogs that “scent” and either track, point, or flush
(reveal a bird’s location and cause it to fly), and retrieve game
birds on land or in water.
American Water Spaniel
(United States)
Boykin Spaniel (United States)
Brittany (France)
Chesapeake Bay Retriever
(United States)
Clumber Spaniel (France)
Cocker Spaniel (England)
Curly-Coated Retriever (England)
English Cocker Spaniel (England)
English Setter (England)
English Springer Spaniel
(England)
Field Spaniel (England)
Flat-Coated Retriever (England)
German Shorthaired Pointer
(Germany)
German Wirehaired Pointer
(Germany)
Golden Retriever (Scotland)
Gordon Setter (Scotland)
Irish Red and White Setter
(Ireland)
Irish Setter (Ireland)
Irish Water Spaniel (Ireland)
Labrador Retriever (Canada)
Lagotto Romagnolo (Italy)
Nederlandse Kooikerhondje
(Netherlands)
Nova Scotia Duck Tolling
Retriever (Canada)
Pointer (England)
Spinone Italiano (Italy)
Sussex Spaniel (England)
Vizsla (Hungary)
Weimaraner (Germany)
Welsh Springer Spaniel (Wales)
Wirehaired Pointing Griffon
(Netherlands)
Wirehaired Vizsla (Hungary)
Sporting dogs and their country of origin include:


DOG CARE 13
.Dog Breeds and Characteristics
HOUNDS
Hounds hunt all game except birds. Hounds were bred not just
to find or flush out game for human hunters to shoot, but to
track their prey by scent or sight and to catch it. Some hounds,
such as Bloodhounds, track by scent. Other hounds, such as
the Afghan and Whippet, track by sight.
Afghan Hound (Afghanistan)
American English Coonhound
(United States)
American Foxhound
(United States)
Azawakh (Burkina Faso/
Mali/Niger)
Basenji (Egypt)
Basset Hound (France)
Beagle (England)
Black and Tan Coonhound
(United States)
Bloodhound (Italy)
Bluetick Coonhound
(United States)
Borzoi (Russia)
Cimeco dell’Etna (Italy)
Dachshund (Germany)
English Foxhound (England)
Grand Basset Griffon Vendéen
(France)
Greyhound (Egypt)
Harrier (England)
Ibizan Hound (Egypt)
Irish Wolfhound (Ireland)
Norwegian Elkhound (Norway)
Otterhound (England)
Petit Basset Griffon Vendéen
(France)
Pharaoh Hound (Egypt)
Plott (United States)
Portuguese Podengo Pequeno
(Portugal)
Redbone Coonhound
(United States)
Rhodesian Ridgeback
(South Africa)
Saluki (Egypt)
Scottish Deerhound (Scotland)
Sloughi (North Africa)
Treeing Walker Coonhound
(United States)
Whippet (England)
Hounds and their country of origin include:


14 DOG CARE
Dog Breeds and Characteristics.
WORKING DOGS
Working dogs were bred to do specific jobs. These breeds
guard livestock, serve as watchdogs, pull carts, tug sleds,
perform mountain and water rescues, and serve as watchdogs.
Some of them also serve in the military.
Akita (Japan)
Alaskan Malamute
(United States)
Anatolian Shepherd Dog (Turkey)
Bernese Mountain Dog
(Switzerland)
Black Russian Terrier (Russia)
Boerboel (South Africa)
Boxer (Germany)
Bullmastiff (England)
Cane Corso (Italy)
Chinook (United States)
Doberman Pinscher (Germany)
Dogue de Bordeaux (France)
German Pinscher (Germany)
Giant Schnauzer (Germany)
Great Dane (Germany)
Great Pyrenees (France)
Greater Swiss Mountain Dog
(Switzerland)
Komondor (Hungary)
Kuvasz (Tibet)
Leonberger (Germany)
Mastiff (England)
Neapolitan Mastiff (Italy)
Newfoundland (Canada)
Portuguese Water Dog (Portugal)
Rottweiler (Germany)
Saint Bernard (Switzerland)
Samoyed (Siberia)
Siberian Husky
(Northeastern Asia)
Standard Schnauzer (Germany)
Tibetan Mastiff (Tibet)
Working dogs and their country of origin include:


DOG CARE 15
.Dog Breeds and Characteristics
Airedale Terrier (England)
American Hairless Terrier
(United States)
American Staffordshire Terrier
(England)
Australian Terrier (Australia)
Bedlington Terrier (England)
Border Terrier (England)
Bull Terrier (England)
Cairn Terrier (Scotland)
Cesky Terrier (Czech Republic)
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
(England)
Glen of Imaal Terrier (Ireland)
Irish Terrier (Ireland)
Kerry Blue Terrier (Ireland)
Lakeland Terrier (England)
Manchester Terrier (England)
Miniature Bull Terrier (England)
Miniature Schnauzer (Germany)
Norfolk Terrier (England)
Norwich Terrier (England)
Parson Russell Terrier (England)
Rat Terrier (United States)
Russell Terrier (England)
Scottish Terrier (Scotland)
Sealyham Terrier (Wales)
Skye Terrier (Scotland)
Smooth Fox Terrier (British Isles)
Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier
(Ireland)
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
(England)
Welsh Terrier (Wales)
West Highland White Terrier
(Scotland)
Wire Fox Terrier (British Isles)
Terriers and their country of origin include:
TERRIERS
Terriers originally were bred to kill rats and to force foxes and
otters out of their dens. The name “terrier” comes from the
Latin terra firma, meaning earth.


16 DOG CARE
Dog Breeds and Characteristics.
American Eskimo Dog
(United States)
Bichon Frise (Spain)
Boston Terrier (United States)
Bulldog (England)
Chinese Shar-Pei (China)
Chow Chow (China)
Coton de Tulear (Madagascar)
Dalmatian (Croatia)
Finnish Spitz (Finland)
French Bulldog (France)
Keeshond (Netherlands)
Lhasa Apso (Tibet)
Löwchen (Germany)
Norwegian Lundehund (Norway)
Poodle (France)
Schipperke (Belgium)
Shiba Inu (Japan)
Tibetan Spaniel (Tibet)
Tibetan Terrier (Tibet)
Xoloitzcuintli (Mexico)
Nonsporting dogs and their country of origin include:
Affenpinscher (Germany)
Brussels Griffon (Belgium)
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
(England)
Chihuahua (Mexico)
Chinese Crested (China)
English Toy Spaniel (England)
Havanese (Cuba)
Italian Greyhound
(Greece/Turkey)
Japanese Chin (Japan)
Maltese (Malta)
Manchester Terrier (England)
Miniature Pinscher (Germany)
Papillon (Spain)
Pekingese (China)
Pomeranian (Germany/Poland)
Poodle (France)
Pug (China)
Shih Tzu (China)
Silky Terrier (Australia)
Toy Fox Terrier (United States)
Yorkshire Terrier (England)
NONSPORTING DOGS
This category is for those breeds that do not fit in other
AKC categories.
TOYS
Toy dogs were bred to be tiny companions.
Toys and their country of origin include:


DOG CARE 17
.Dog Breeds and Characteristics
Australian Cattle Dog (Australia)
Australian Shepherd
(United States)
Bearded Collie (Scotland)
Beauceron (France)
Belgian Malinois (Belgium)
Belgian Sheepdog (Belgium)
Belgian Tervuren (Belgium)
Bergamasco Sheepdog (Italy)
Berger Picard (France)
Border Collie (England/Scotland)
Bouvier des Flandres (Belgium)
Briard (France)
Canaan Dog (Israel)
Cardigan Welsh Corgi (Wales)
Collie (England/Scotland)
Entlebucher Mountain Dog
(Switzerland)
Finnish Lapphund (Finland)
German Shepherd Dog
(Germany)
Icelandic Sheepdog (Iceland)
Miniature American Shepherd
(United States)
Norwegian Buhund (Norway)
Old English Sheepdog (England)
Pembroke Welsh Corgi (Wales)
Polish Lowland Sheepdog
(Poland)
Puli (Hungary)
Pumi (Hungary)
Pyrenean Shepherd (France)
Shetland Sheepdog (Scotland)
Spanish Water Dog (Spain)
Swedish Vallhund (Sweden)
HERDING DOGS
Herding dogs were bred to herd sheep or cattle. You can
especially see them in action in Australia, Scotland,
England, and Wales.
Herding dogs and their country of origin include:


18 DOG CARE
Dog Breeds and Characteristics.
Here are some of the most
popular breeds of dogs along with
some of their characteristics.
American Cocker Spaniel.
Height: 141/2 to 15 1/2 inches,
females an inch shorter; weight:
24 to 28 pounds; coat: silky;
color: solid buff, black, parti-
color (a predominant color with
patches of one or more other
colors), tricolor, and others; ears
hang down. This cheerful and
gentle sporting dog is playful
and does well in confined spaces
if given plenty of exercise.
Irish Setter. Height: 26 to 28
inches, females two inches
shorter; weight: 60 to 70 pounds;
coat: silky with longer chest
hair; color: mahogany or rich
chestnut brown; ears hang down.
This popular and regal sporting
dog ranges in personality from
clownish to reserved.
Labrador Retriever. Height:
211/2 to 241/2 inches; weight: 55
to 75 pounds; coat: straight and
dense; color: golden to black;
ears hang down. One of the
finest family dogs in the world,
this good-natured, adaptable
sporting dog does fine in the
city and country provided it
gets plenty of exercise. Labs are
strong swimmers.


DOG CARE 19
.Dog Breeds and Characteristics
Afghan Hound. Height: 26 to 28
inches; weight: 50 to 60 pounds;
coat: long, straight, thick, and
silky hair, fine in texture, with
short hair on face; color: black,
cream, silver, brindle (brownish
with black stripes and flecks);
ears hang down. This dog ranges
in personality from nervous to
clownish to dignified. Requires
extra grooming.
Beagle (13-inch and 15-inch).
Height: 10 to 13 inches (13-
inch), 13 to 15 inches (15-
inch); weight: 18 to 20 pounds
(13-inch), 20 to 30 pounds
(15-inch); coat: hard; color:
combination of black, white,
and tan; ears hang down. This
good-natured and cheerful dog
is very adaptable.
Dachshund (Standard
Smooth). Height: 9 inches;
weight: 10 to 20 pounds; coat:
hard; color: black-and-tan or a
solid, reddish brown; ears hang
down. This very curious hound
loves companionship but avoids
long walks. A good indoor pet.
Alaskan Malamute. Height: 23
to 25 inches; weight: 75 to 110
pounds; coat: coarse; color: black
or shades of gray with a lighter
face and underbody; ears prick
up. This working dog can range
from playful to quietly dignified.
If left isolated, the dog can
become aggressive. Often used to
pull sleds in northern climates.
May require extra grooming.


20 DOG CARE
Dog Breeds and Characteristics.
Boxer. Height: 21 to 25 inches;
weight: 60 to 75 pounds; coat:
hard; color: light tan, reddish
brown, often with white
markings on the face, neck, and
feet; ears are sometimes cropped
for show or are left hanging;
tail docked. This working dog
is often good-natured with an
expressive face.
Golden Retriever. Height:
211/2 to 24 inches; weight:
55 to 75 pounds; coat: thick,
repels water, can be wavy or
straight, with feathers on the
neck, underbody, and back of
the forelegs; color: golden tan in
a variety of shades, from light
to dark; ears are short and fall
close to the cheek; its thick tail
curves slightly upward. This
friendly, active dog makes an
ideal family pet.
Airedale Terrier. Height: 22 to 23
inches; weight: 45 to 60 pounds;
coat: hard and wiry; color:
tan head, legs, and chest with
blackish back and sides; ears
fold forward. This dog is very
playful as a puppy and matures
into a very dignified adult.


DOG CARE 21
.Dog Breeds and Characteristics
Fox Terrier (Smooth and Wire).
Height: 141/2 to 151/2 inches;
weight: 15 to 19 pounds; coat:
short and wiry; color: mostly
white with black and tan or tan
patches; ears fold forward. This
dog is one of the most bold and
wildly energetic breeds. You can
have a lot of fun playing fetch
with this dog.
Irish Terrier. Height: 18 inches;
weight: 25 to 27 pounds; coat:
short and wiry; color: reddish or
golden red, sometimes lighter;
ears fold forward. This terrier
has a lot of spirit and is fearless
and full of spunk.
Chihuahua (Smooth and
Longhaired). Height: 5 inches;
weight: 2 to 6 pounds; coat: soft;
color: white, blonde, tan, black
and tan, patched, and other
variations; ears prick up. This
toy dog is made for indoors.
While some are bold, others are
timid and nervous.
Pekingese. Height: 8 to 9
inches; weight: 14 pounds; coat:
coarse with a thick ruff; color:
red, tan, black, white, black-
and-tan, patched, brownish, or
brindle; ears hang down. This
toy dog seems big for its britches
but is a favorite indoor dog.
Requires extra grooming.


22 DOG CARE
Dog Breeds and Characteristics.
Yorkshire Terrier. Height: 7 to 9
inches; weight: 3 to 7 pounds;
coat: straight and silky with
long hair hanging down from
the ears and muzzle; color: dark
gray with rich tan markings;
ears prick up. Some people like
to pamper this toy dog. Others
see the dog as a ball of energy.
Requires extra grooming.
Bulldog. Height: 14 to 15
inches; weight: 40 to 55 pounds;
coat: glossy; color: brindle,
white, reddish, tan, or patched;
distinctive protruding lower jaw.
This nonsporting dog, once a
fierce fighter, can be very sweet
and lovable. A mature bulldog
is dignified and doesn’t like to
walk much.
Dalmatian. Height: 19 to 24
inches; weight: 46 to 65 pounds;
coat: hard; color: white with
black or brown spots; ears hang
down. This nonsporting dog is
the famous firedog. It is playful
and needs plenty of exercise.
Poodle (Miniature). Height: 10
to 15 inches; weight: 14 to 17
pounds; coat: curly and dense;
color: black, white, gray, blue,
silver, cream, reddish, dark or
pale brown; ears hang down.
This dog is one of the most
famous show dogs. Originated in
France, the Miniature Poodle can
be bouncy and lively but also
nervous and excitable. Requires
extra grooming.


DOG CARE 23
.Dog Breeds and Characteristics
Collie (Rough). Height: 24 to 26
inches, females 2 inches shorter;
weight: 50 to 75 pounds; coat:
matted and thick with longer
hair underneath; color: gold
to brown or black with white
markings; ears three-quarters
prick with the top quarter
tipping forward. Lassie, the
proud and gentle television star,
was a Collie. This herding dog
requires extra grooming.
German Shepherd. Height: 24
to 26 inches, females 2 inches
shorter; weight: 65 to 100 pounds;
coat: thick, hard, and straight
with a dense undercoat; color:
black and tan, black with tan
points, golden tan, steel or silver
gray, and black; ears prick up.
Recognized as a police dog, this
herding dog is very responsive to
firm obedience training.
Shetland Sheepdog. Height:
13 to 16 inches; weight: 20 to 30
pounds; coat: outer coat long,
straight, harsh hair, with short,
furry, and dense undercoat;
color: black, bluish, or golden,
marked with varying amounts
of white or tan; ears small and
three-quarters erect, tips breaking
forward. This is a gentle and
sensitive dog and very trainable.
Requires extra grooming.





DOG CARE 25
.Getting to Know Your Dog
Getting to Know
Your Dog
Dogs are remarkable animals. It’s hard to imagine that a Great
Dane and a Toy Poodle are the same species, but they are
genetically identical, have the same anatomy, and grow up
the same way.
Newborn puppies have closed eyes and ear canals and no
teeth. They also cannot walk. But they do have fully functional
senses of smell and taste, which they use to find their mother.
Immediately after whelping (birth), a puppy can drag itself to its
mother’s belly, where it can feed on her milk and find comfort.
By the third week, puppies can see, hear, and crawl.
They also begin to teethe. By the sixth week, incisors and
canine teeth have come in. These are puppy teeth and they are
temporary. The first of the permanent teeth begin to come in
by the third month, and by the seventh month the puppy has a
full set of teeth in place.
Puppies can run by week five, and so begins a particularly
active social and learning period. Their brains are rushing
toward full development, so this is a good time to begin
socializing and training.
Most puppies are sexually mature and can mate when
they are 10 months old. Female dogs go into heat every six or
seven months for about a three-week period. If she becomes
pregnant, a dog will give birth to a litter in about 63 days. This
means that most dogs can whelp two litters a year.
Until it is weaned, or introduced to solid food, the
only nourishment a puppy needs comes from its
mother’s milk. Most mother dogs wean their litters
when they are three to five weeks old.


26 DOG CARE
Getting to Know Your Dog.
A puppy is considered mature at its first birthday, but it
might take longer than a year for it to reach full size. And its
personality might continue to be puppylike for much longer.
Small and medium-sized dogs live about 15 years; a large
dog might live only nine to 12 years. As dogs age, their senses
begin to fail: They lose their sight and become hard of hearing,
and their senses of smell and taste diminish.
Parts of a Dog
Every dog has a head, body, and legs. Each of these body parts
differs among breeds as do other features such as the dog’s
size and its hair color.
THE HEAD
A variety in head shape and size is one reason dogs look so
different from each other. The skull can be wide and flat, like
a bulldog’s, or narrow and long, like a collie’s. Many breeds
have skulls shaped somewhere in between. But all dogs have
a stop, which is a small indentation in the forehead. Of course,
some dogs have a pronounced stop, while on others the stop is
hardly noticeable.
On the outside, dogs’ ears come in many shapes and sizes.
They can be short or long, folded or upright, or droopy. But
dogs’ middle and inner ears—the parts that do the hearing—are
the same for all breeds. The design of dogs’ ears gives them a
keen sense of hearing that allows them to hear sounds that
humans can’t. This is why dogs are sometimes the first to
notice a person’s arrival.
Male dogs are
particularly
territorial and
will mark their
territory with
urine, feces, and
the scent from
their anal glands.
Dogs have a remarkable sense of smell. A dog’s
nostrils have many nerve endings, which pick up
minute odors. When a dog sniffs, it is sizing up its
environment. Scientific studies have found that
dogs’ noses are 20 to 40 times more sensitive than
those of humans.


DOG CARE 27
The illustration shows parts of the dog. Many of these terms will be
familiar to you, and others will be new. They are the terms used by
judges in dog shows and are known to all experts.
1. Nose
2. Muzzle
3. Stop
4. Skull
5. Occiput
6. Arch, or crest
7. Withers, or top
of shoulders
8. Loin
9. Hip
10. Tail
11. Rump
12. Ankles, or hock
13. Stifle, or knee
14. Chest
15. Elbow
16. Pastern,
or metacarpus
17. Wrist, or carpus
18. Forearm
19. Point of shoulder
20. Shoulder
21. Ear, or leather
22. Dewlap
23. Lips, or flews
24. Cheek
25. Hind foot
26. Forefoot
27. Toes, or digits
28. Dewclaws
29. Thigh
30. Brisket
31. Sheath (male)
3.
2.
1.
4.
5.
6.
7. 8.
9.
10.
12.
13.
16.
15.
14.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
27.
30.
31.
11.
25.
29.
26.
28.


28 DOG CARE
Getting to Know Your Dog.
Because dogs are predators, their eyes are positioned close
together and facing forward on the head, and their vision is
suited for both day and night. This allows dogs to detect a lot
of detail and movement. In addition to the two eyelids that
open and close the eye, dogs also have a third eyelid, called
the haw or nictitating membrane, which helps protect and
clean the eyes. It is hard to see the haw because it is hidden
in the inner corner of the eye when the eye is open.
Most adult dogs have 42 permanent teeth. In the front
part of the mouth, these include 12 incisors and four canines
for biting and tearing food. In the rear part of the mouth, there
are 16 premolars and 10 molars for chewing.
Vocal folds, located in the neck, determine a dog’s bark,
growl, and whimper. The size of the vocal folds differs among
breeds. This difference is how a Labrador Retriever gets its
deep, loud bark and a Yorkshire Terrier its piercing, high-
pitched one. Interestingly, the Basenji breed does not bark.
THE BODY AND LEGS
One of the most distinctive features of a dog’s body is its hair,
or coat (although there are a few hairless breeds). Whether
long or short, single- or multicolored, thin or thick, or straight
or curly, dogs are covered with it. What’s more, it moves!
When a dog is afraid, the hair on its hackles (its shoulders and
back) stands up straight.
Sometimes a dog’s hair is so thick and long that it is
difficult to determine the dog’s actual size or to see its body
shape. But under all that hair is a wide, deep chest and a thin
abdomen. A large chest indicates a formidable heart and
lungs. These organs give a conditioned dog the endurance to
run long distances without stopping. Dogs have 13 pairs of
ribs and 27 vertebrae.
Besides being long, pink, and slimy, a dog’s tongue
is an important part of its cooling system. Moisture
evaporating from a panting dog’s tongue helps keep
the dog cool on a warm, sunny day.


DOG CARE 29
.Getting to Know Your Dog
Dog legs and paws are built for seeking and stalking prey.
Muscles of the fore- and hindquarters give endurance, and
bone length promotes movement. The pads on the bottom of
the paws cushion the impact of running and muffle noise.
Tails vary in length and shape. Tail length is determined
by the number of tailbones a dog has. The shape of the tail
depends on the tail length and the breed. For example, the
Siberian Husky has a sickle tail that is carried in an arc over
its back. The Dalmation has a whip tail—it sticks out straight
like an arrow. The English Bulldog has a short, stubby fused
tail that twists like a corkscrew.
Most dogs have four toes on the rear feet. However,
a fifth toe, or dewclaw, is often found on the inside
leg above the paw on the forearms, hind legs, or
both. The dewclaw is left over from the dog’s early
days and has no use today. Sometimes owners have
the dewclaws removed.





DOG CARE 31
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
Being a Responsible
Dog Owner
Acquiring a dog is a major decision. Before you get a dog, you
should understand the kinds of responsibilities you will have to
care for the dog its entire life. You will need to feed it properly,
groom it regularly, and tend to its medical needs. A dog requires
proper training, and it should never be treated improperly.
Selecting Your Dog
Whether you live in the city, in the suburbs, or in the country,
there is a dog that can fit your personality, location, and
lifestyle. The climate where you live might determine the type
of dog you should select. Dog owners in the far north might
choose breeds with a thick coat. If you live in the city or in an
apartment, you probably
should choose a breed
of dog that is small to
medium in size. Large
dogs need plenty of
room to exercise.
To select your dog,
first figure out why you
want one. Most people
want a dog for compan-
ionship. If you live on
a farm, your dog might
become a working ani-
mal; if you live in the
city, you might want a
watchdog. Some dogs,
such as the Labrador
Retriever, do better


32 DOG CARE
Being a Responsible Dog Owner.
around children than more aggressive breeds. Some people
choose a dog because of its special traits, such as one that
doesn’t shed.
Next consider the type of dog you want. Some people
want a purebred because they like its appearance or personality,
and they know what the dog will look like when it grows up.
Others find that a mixed breed will do just as well and is less
expensive. You can find a mixed-breed dog at an animal shelter,
through a humane society or rescue group, or advertised in
your local newspaper.
If you want to buy a purebred dog, find out everything
you can about the breed so you can ask the breeder questions.
Some purebred dogs may be more prone to certain medical
problems; good breeders will alert you. Mixed-breed dogs also
may develop medical problems, but there is no way to anticipate
the type of problems.
Knowing Dog Ordinances
You need to be aware of dog ordinances in your area. Check
with your veterinarian, animal control center, or local police
to learn the laws and regulations you must follow. Ask your
librarian to help you look up “dogs” or “animals” in your city
or county code. Some cities have pamphlets outlining your
obligations. Pay attention to the law.
Keep in mind that
some breeds are
better suited
than others for
families with
small children.
Certain breeds
are more
aggressive,
stubborn, reactive,
or hyperactive;
more likely to bite
people; or harder
to train. Ask a
veterinarian to
help you select
the best pet for
your family and
to make sure it
is healthy.
Healthy Choice
When you are evaluating a puppy or an adult dog,
the dog should appear friendly and outgoing. Puppies
should be playful, not shy or anxious. Make sure the
dog’s eyes are bright and shiny and have no discharge.
The inner eyelids should be smooth and pink. Check
the dog’s ears for debris. The skin should feel warm
and dry to the touch. The dog’s coat ought to be clean
and sweet smelling. The dog should be in good form
and build, not extremely fat or extremely thin.


DOG CARE 33
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
The types of laws regulating
dogs include:
• Leash laws. Many communities
require that a dog be on a
leash in all public areas unless
otherwise designated.
• Pooper-scooper laws. These
laws require owners to pick up
and properly dispose of their
pet’s feces. Violators may have
to pay a fine.
• Licensing laws. Not only will a
license help your community
keep track of dogs, it will also
help people know whom to
call if your dog is lost.
• Rabies vaccination laws. These
exist in every state.
• Nuisance laws. Common nui-
sance violations are excessive
barking, howling, or whining.
• Dangerous or vicious dog laws. If your dog has injured a person or
pet or damages property, you may be required to confine or muzzle
it, and you may have to insure your dog. In some cases, it may have
to be destroyed. Also, some household insurance policies will not
cover damage or liabilities caused by certain breeds. Have your
parent or guardian check their insurance policy for this.
• Breed-specific laws. These laws are controversial, but generally they
single out breeds such as Pit Bulls, Rottweilers, Doberman Pinschers,
Chow Chows, and others for specific regulations. Some believe these
laws are discriminatory while others believe that certain breeds
require additional regulations.
• Spaying and neutering laws. Some communities have ordinances
regulating the breeding of dogs.


34 DOG CARE
Being a Responsible Dog Owner.
Training Your Dog
From performing in the circus to rounding up herds of
sheep, dogs of all ages can be trained to do a variety of
tasks. Some dogs receive special training to help people
who are deaf. Law enforcement agencies might rely on
dogs to find smuggled currency. And dogs can be trained
to aid police with the apprehension of criminals.
Your dog probably won’t learn such complicated
behaviors as those described above, but your training goal
is very important: to help your dog live in the human
world. This means that your dog will fit in with you, your
family’s activities, and society.
House-Training
The first step in training your dog is house-training, or getting
your dog to urinate and defecate outside. This can begin when
a puppy is six weeks old.
Puppies generally need to go to the bathroom after they
eat, when they wake up from a nap, and after playing hard. A
puppy will learn to develop a preference for the type of surface
it uses. The trick in house-training is to teach the puppy that
your yard is the surface it prefers.
Go easy on the puppy when you first bring it home. It will
take a couple of days for the young dog to begin to get used
to its new home. During this time, the puppy probably won’t
respond well to a sudden training regimen. Accidents will
happen, but remember not to scold the little dog. Be patient.
Begin house-training the first time you feed your puppy
in the morning. Offer food to the puppy for only 10 minutes.
Then pick up any uneaten food and take the puppy outside.
Take a small portion of the puppy’s food with you for a
reward. Put the puppy on the ground. When the puppy begins
to squat, say “Go potty, go potty.” When the puppy finally
goes to the bathroom, praise it lavishly, say “Good potty, good
potty,” and give the food reward. Used together, the vocal and
food rewards will reinforce what you want the puppy to do.
Know the difference between house-training (learning to be a good
member of the family), socialization (adjusting to the environment),
and obedience training (learning to understand commands).


DOG CARE 35
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
Take the puppy outside after every meal, after every nap,
during hard play sessions, and any other time you think the
puppy might need to go. Take the puppy to the same door,
repeating the question, “Do you want to go out?” Follow the
same route each time you go out.
Take along a “pooper-scooper” or an ordinary plastic bag,
to help you clean up after your dog. Put the bag over your
hand like a mitten, pick up the dog’s mess with your covered
hand, turn the bag inside out, close it, and throw it away.
If you find the puppy has had an accident, simply clean
it up. If you try to correct your dog after the accident, it won’t
understand why it is being scolded. If you see the puppy going
to the bathroom in the house, gently correct it with a sharp
but quiet “No!” and take it outside to its regular spot. While
out there, praise your puppy for going outside.
Crates for Pups
It is a good idea to get a crate in which
to confine a puppy. Crates might seem
small, but dogs like cozy places of
their own. Think of a crate as an indoor
doghouse. Crates also help house-
training because dogs won’t go to the
bathroom in the same area in which
they eat or sleep.
Buy a crate that is just big enough to
allow your dog to easily stand up, turn around, lie down, and stretch out.
You can buy a crate large enough to fit your dog when it is fully grown,
but pad the inside to make the space the right size for your puppy. If you
don’t, the space might be large enough that your puppy will use one end
as a bathroom.
Until your dog is house-trained, you might want to keep it in the
crate whenever you are not handling it. This will make the house-training
easier. Later, you can let the dog out unsupervised for longer periods.
But leave the door open so your dog can return to the crate to rest.
The important thing to remember is that the crate is your dog’s safe
place. Make it comfortable with soft bedding, and never confine your
dog there as punishment.


36 DOG CARE
Being a Responsible Dog Owner.
Clean up an accident immediately and thoroughly. Any
odor left behind will make that area an attractive bathroom
location. You can clear away the odor with a vinegar and water
mixture or a pet odor remover (available at pet stores). Other
cleaning products won’t get rid of the odor and might even
encourage the puppy to use that area again.
Socialization
Socializing a puppy with other people and dogs is an impor-
tant part of helping your pet become well-adjusted to its
environment. In nature, litters of wolf puppies and other wild
canines interact with other members of their pack. By doing
this, they learn how to accept the presence of other animals.
Our pets need this same socialization period in their lives.
Many times people just leave their dog out in the backyard or
remove it from the house when company arrives. Never having
the opportunity to be in the presence of people can then make
your dog nervous and fearful of people later in life.
Obedience Training
Basic obedience training is like teaching a child good manners.
The commands for dogs are “sit,” “stay,” and “come,” followed
by “down” and “heel.” Teaching a dog basic obedience makes
sense because our pets do not
naturally know what is expected of
them in the human world. We have
to teach them.
Learning how to respond to
basic obedience commands can
literally save a dog’s life in today’s
world of busy streets and fast
automobiles. Obedience training
can begin when dogs are four to six
months old and continue throughout
a dog’s lifetime. Obedience-trained
Be consistent and
keep a regular
schedule. Praise
your puppy every
step of the way.
When the puppy
gets the idea,
which might take
weeks, it will
go to the door
when it wants
to be let out.
Try to introduce your new puppy to as many of your friends and
family members as possible as often as possible. Do not allow anyone to
roughhouse, tease, or torment your puppy. Instead, let visitors hold the
dog, pet it, give it food treats, and talk gently and softly to it. Remember,
good behavior on the part of people will help ensure good behavior in
your puppy.


DOG CARE 37
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
dogs make better pets, have fewer behavioral problems, and
generally bond more closely with their owners. Certain breeds
of dogs are more trainable than others; sporting and working
breeds generally are the easiest to train.
There are many training methods, some more effective than
others. Make sure that the method you choose fits both you
and your dog. If your dog is strong-willed, choose a training
method that can make the best of this tendency. If your dog is
submissive, you may need a training method that will boost
its confidence.
Whatever training program
you pick, make sure you stick to
it. In some cases, if you apply a
little of this program and a little of
that one, you can confuse your pet
and weaken the effectiveness of
the training.
A good trainer can help you
figure out what works best with
your dog. This can be an excellent
way to train your pet and
to improve your own skills in
handling it.
Advanced training for hunting,
herding, search and rescue, police
attack, or assisting people who are
blind may come after the basics are learned. These types
of advanced trainings are usually handled under the guidance
of a professional trainer. Most dogs are not suited to this type
of training.
The most important part of training your dog is consistency
and fairness. By properly house-training, socializing, and
obedience training your dog, you will help make it a
responsible and joyful member of your family.
Some owners elect to take their dogs to obedience classes. If you decide
to do this, don’t wait. Enroll your dog once it’s had all of its vaccinations.
Classes may range from basic puppy kindergarten, to obedience for
an older dog, to advanced training. To pick the right one for your dog’s
abilities, ask your veterinarian for help.


38 DOG CARE
Being a Responsible Dog Owner.
Helping Your Dog Learn
Help your dog learn by praising the dog when it does what you
want it to do and correcting it when it acts inappropriately. Using
these two actions, dogs can be taught to do many things.
The trick is to be fast because dogs have short memories.
You must see the behavior and follow it immediately with
praise or correction. If you wait a few minutes to give praise or
correction, you probably are reinforcing a behavior other than
the one you intended. A classic example is calling a dog to you
to correct an inappropriate behavior. The dog will think you
are correcting it for coming to you and will likely stop respond-
ing when you say “come.”
Be sure to praise only when the dog performs a
desired behavior and to praise as often as possible. The
American Kennel Club recommends following a correc-
tion immediately with praise. You can do this by giving
the correction for the inappropriate behavior and then
asking the dog to do something it already knows how
to do. When the dog performs the behavior, give lots
of praise. Pet your dog, say “good dog,” and feed it a
snack. This will help keep your dog happy. Remember,
your dog only wants to please you.
Make corrections firm but kind. You want the dog
to feel the weight of the correction without becoming
afraid. When your dog makes a mistake, use the word
“no!” sharply but not loudly, and it will learn the meaning.
Give commands just once and use the same command each
time. If you use different words, the dog will become confused
and training will take a lot longer. Also, the dog will learn better
if only one person does the training in the beginning. Later on,
the whole family can join in, but it is important that everyone
use the same commands.
You can use a training collar to help train your dog. Also
called “slip” or choke collars, these collars allow you to exert
as much or as little control as you need. You can get your dog’s
attention and encourage proper behavior by giving a light,
quick pull on the leash. This tightens the collar around the
neck but only for a moment, then it will loosen.
Let a puppy examine and smell a collar and leash before
you use them. Then let the puppy try out the collar for a day
before you begin training. After the dog is used to the collar,
snap on the leash and let the dog drag it around for a while,
watching that the leash doesn’t get tangled on something.
A pet supplier can help you
find the right training collar
for your dog. Remember
to use training collars only
during training time.


DOG CARE 39
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
The Star Dog of the World Trade Center
The brightest star in the sky is Sirius, the Dog Star. It shines more than
20 times brighter than the sun.
Another kind of dog star shined brightly on September 11, 2001, at
the World Trade Center in New York. Sirius, a bomb-sniffing Labrador
Retriever, and his handler, police officer David Lim, were on duty
there. Their work was suddenly interrupted by a massive explosion.
“One must have gotten by us,” Lim said as he locked Sirius in his crate
and raced up the tower steps to help.
Terrorists had purposefully piloted an airplane into the building.
Officer Lim was frantically helping people down the North Tower’s fire
stairs to safety when it began to fall. Miraculously, they survived.
Four months later, in the wreckage of the buildings, Sirius was
discovered dead in his damaged crate. When officer Lim was notified,
he rushed to Ground Zero. The
dog had been killed instantly
when the building collapsed.
As Lim carried his friend’s
broken body to a New York
Police Department truck,
excavators stopped their
engines. New York police
officers saluted and firefighters
stood at attention.
On April 24, 2002, a memo-
rial service for Sirius was held.
More than 200 people and K-9
units from across the country
gathered to honor brave Sirius.
Officer Lim was presented with
Sirius' metal water bowl, which
had been pulled from Lim’s
damaged car. Lim broke down
after receiving the bowl, which
had been engraved with Sirius’
shield number and these words:
“I gave my life so that you may save others.”


40 DOG CARE
Being a Responsible Dog Owner.
After the dog is used to the leash, take up your end of it and
walk around with your pet, applying little or no pressure.
Gradually, over a short period, increase your control until your
dog is completely comfortable being on the leash.
Multiple, short periods of training are most effective. Four or
five sessions a day, five to 10 minutes each, works well for puppies.
Older dogs can tolerate sessions of up to 20 minutes long.
Basic Training
It's important for every dog to know these five basic commands. Teach one
command at a time, and reinforce those already learned before moving on
to a new one.
“Sit.” Have your dog on the leash to your left. Say “Sit” and, at the same
time, press the dog's rump into a sitting position. When your dog is seated
to your satisfaction, give a bit of food and lots of praise. Repeat the lesson
until your dog sits on its own.
“Stay.” Now have your dog sit. Tell it to “stay” and drop the leash. Raise
your palm in front of its nose and then back away. If your dog tries to
follow, say “No” and hold your raised palm toward it. Have your dog sit
and then repeat the exercise until it stays on command.
“Come.” Walk with your dog heeling beside you. Then step backward,
pulling the dog with you and saying “Come.” Pet and feed your dog a little.
Repeat, using the leash less and less, until your dog comes to you to be
petted and rewarded.
“Down.” First, get your dog to sit. Then say “Down” and press its shoulders
down while pulling its front feet forward. Your dog will lie down. Repeat until
your dog lies down when you give the command.
“Heel.” The goal is to have your dog walk at your left side at an even pace.
Hold the end of the leash in your right hand with the training collar above the
dog's neck in your left hand. Your dog’s chest should be kept next to your left
leg. Gently but firmly pull the dog into the proper place with your left hand as
you walk along, giving the command “Heel!” Praise your dog as soon as it
is in the right position. Teach your dog to stop when you stop and walk when
you walk.
Canine Good Citizen
The American Kennel Club’s Canine Good Citizen® certification program
rewards dogs that have good manners at home and in the community. The
program stresses responsible pet ownership and basic good manners for dogs.
For more information, contact the AKC (see the resources section at the end of
this pamphlet).


DOG CARE 41
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
Caring for Your Dog
Your dog needs what you need: food, shelter,
love, and companionship. It relies on you, so
treat your dog with care and respect.
Dogs have their origins in the wild
canines of prehistoric times. These social pack
animals were carnivores (meat eaters) and ate
what they could hunt and kill or scavenge.
They wasted nothing. The carnivores ate the
muscles, bones, and organs as well as the
stomach and intestinal contents of their prey.
The parts supplied protein, carbohydrates, fat,
minerals, vitamins, and fiber—just what the
canines needed to live.
Today, wolves, foxes, coyotes, and
jackals hunt for food, but they can’t always
find a balanced meal. Our pet dogs have an
advantage over their relatives in the wild.
They only have to hunt for their feeding bowls to find a
healthy serving of commercially manufactured dog food.
Feeding Your Dog
Just as infants, toddlers, children, and adults require different
amounts of liquids and food during their lifetime, so do dogs.
There are different diets for different stages of your pet’s life. A
newborn puppy up to the age of three or four weeks depends
wholly on its mother’s milk. When it is weaned, you should
introduce your dog to a “puppy” diet, which usually contains
higher levels of protein and carbohydrates than the mother’s
milk as well as a balanced mineral content.
A general rule of thumb is to feed a puppy on
the basis of one cup (8 ounces) of dry food per
20 pounds of body weight, three times a day. For
example, feed a 5-pound puppy only one-quarter
cup of dry food three times daily; feed a 10-pound
puppy one-half cup three times a day.


42 DOG CARE
Being a Responsible Dog Owner.
Feeding canned food to your puppy may be necessary at
first because of the lack of tooth development. However, try to
soak dry food in water to soften it and feed it to your dog as
soon as possible. Canned foods are more flavorful, but they are
mostly water. Pound for pound, they do not provide as much
nutrition for a puppy as dry kibble.
As dogs age, their diet requirements will vary according
to their existing health problems and levels of activity. If your
older dog is healthy, feed your pet a “senior” or “lite” diet
once or twice a day. However, if your dog has certain medical
problems (such as kidney disease, arthritis or joint issues, or
heart problems), ask your veterinarian to recommend a diet
specifically modified for your pet’s condition. That diet will
not only help to manage your dog’s medical problems but also
may improve the quality of your pet's life and help lengthen
its lifespan.
When your dog reaches bone growth maturity (which
varies with each breed), it’s time to switch to an “adult
dog” diet. Adjust the amount of food you give it
based on its weight and breed. Reduce the number
of meals from three times a day to two times. If you
continue to feed your pet three meals a day—or keep
the dog food bowl filled during the day—your dog
may become obese.
Be sure to keep
plenty of fresh,
clean water
available for your
dog at all times.
If you have an
outside dog, place
the water bowl in
the shade. Check
often and refill the
bowl regularly.
Keep the water
bowl clean and
free of debris by
washing it
as needed.
Dog Feeding Don’ts
Don’t feed a dog pork bones, chicken bones, chop
bones, T-bones, or other bones that can splinter. They
can cause serious injury. You may give your dog a
knucklebone, which does not splinter, or a dog toy
that is solid enough that your pet can’t chew it up
and swallow it.


DOG CARE 43
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
Your dog’s level of activity will affect how
much food the dog needs to eat. Working dogs
(such as herding breeds and police dogs) require
more protein and carbohydrates but not a
proportional increase of fat in their diet. However,
dogs in cold climates require—in addition to
extra protein and carbohydrates—a much higher
amount of fat in their diet. Dogs recovering from
certain injuries or illness may need special dietary
supplements. A “sit-in-your-lap” dog with little
activity should have a controlled diet that keeps it
from becoming obese.
Housing Your Dog
Though many dogs live indoors with their
owners, others spend most of their lives outside.
Dogs that live outdoors need shelter. How you
house your dog depends on the climate, the type
of dog you have, and where you live.
All dogs are not necessarily outdoor dogs.
A Great Dane, for example, is a big dog but has
a short coat and could freeze outside in winter
temperatures. Pug-nosed small breeds, like English Bulldogs,
do very poorly outdoors in hot climates where they have a
hard time panting to keep their bodies cool. Most small and
shorthaired dogs are best kept inside when it gets cold.
The rate of aging varies among the different breeds
of dogs. “Toy” and small breeds may live to be over
15 years old, while “giant” breeds may be considered
very old at 9 or 10 years of age.
In 2012 the United States Postal
Service issued the “Dogs at Work”
stamps to celebrate how dogs
partner with people to help and
protect us.
Like wolves, dogs develop a winter coat. However,
they won’t properly develop that coat if kept indoors
during the winter. For that reason, don’t keep a dog
indoors during the day in winter and then send it out
into the cold at night. Dogs do get frostbite and can
freeze to death in very cold climates. An outside
dog should be outside all the time except when
temperatures fall below zero.


44 DOG CARE
Being a Responsible Dog Owner.
If you plan to house your dog outdoors, start when the dog
is a puppy. An older dog that is used to being kept indoors will
have a hard time adapting to outside living. If you buy an adult
dog, find out if it was raised as an outdoor dog before leaving it
outside. In extreme weather conditions—hot or cold—bring the
dog inside.
An outdoor dog needs a dry, elevated doghouse with
clean, dry bedding, and a flap over the entrance in wintertime
to keep out drafts. It should be small enough to allow the dog’s
body heat to keep the space warm. Dogs need protection from
wet cold. If you have a garage, consider adding a dog door to
the garage and put a soft cushion in the warmest corner.
If you live in the north, you will need to give your pet extra
care in the winter. Check outdoor water bowls often when the
temperature is below freezing. When necessary break the ice or
refill the bowl with warm water. In winter, outdoor dogs also
need more calories, so increase the amount you feed your pet.
On the other hand, indoor dogs may get less exercise when it is
cold, so feed them less to avoid weight gain.
Dogs kept in extremely hot or humid environments need
air circulation, plenty of clean, fresh water, and daylong shade.
In summertime, be sure to change the water at least twice
daily to keep it clean and fresh and free of algae. Be aware that
dogs can suffer from heat exhaustion and die of heatstroke.
A dog that is kept outdoors should have access to adequate
food, water, and shelter at all times.


DOG CARE 45
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
Exercising Your Dog
Dogs don’t like being cooped up inside
or out. Even if you have a large yard
for your dog, that does not mean it is
getting enough exercise. A dog in need
of exercise is both bored and unruly.
Exercise provides both physical and
mental stimulation. Exercise gives a dog
an outlet for energy and builds strong
bodies and good muscle tone.
How do you decide how much
exercise your dog needs? It depends on
the age, weight, health, and breed of
the dog. Ask yourself these questions
before you start exercising your dog:
Is your dog eating all the time? Is your
dog bored? Is your dog a hunter or
working dog that likes to run? A Great
Dane might need a long hike each day
to stay in shape. Do you have a small
breed that stations itself on the couch?
A walk around the block might be
enough to keep a toy dog fit.
Pay attention to your dog’s health as you begin an
exercise program.
• Bring water if you plan to be out for a long time; give your
dog only small portions of water before and immediately
after exercise.
• Exercise during the cooler parts of the day to keep your dog
from overheating.
• Give your dog time to digest food before exercising.
• Avoid extreme heat or cold; hot or frozen surfaces can hurt
your dog’s paws.
• Avoid surfaces covered with chemicals such as oil, anti-
freeze, and chemical de-icers used in winter; these can burn
the pads on the bottom of the paws or might make your dog
sick if it licks off these chemicals.
• After exercise in the summer, check your dog all over for
ticks and burrs.


46 DOG CARE
Being a Responsible Dog Owner.
Puppies have soft pads and should start off on softer surfaces,
such as grass or dirt, until their pads toughen. Any dog not used
to exercise should start out with several short walks a day. This
is true for puppies, however energetic they may be, and dogs
that are out of shape and overweight. Older dogs might not be
able to handle much more than a gentle walk. If you have any
concerns about how to start an exercise program for your dog,
consult your veterinarian.
Dogs with thin or short hair might need a coat or sweater in
cold weather.


DOG CARE 47
.Being a Responsible Dog Owner
When walking your dog, be sure to use a leash and
collar. This will help keep your dog safe. Besides, most cities
have laws that require dogs to be on a leash. Some parks have
leash-free areas where dogs can run free, but they are best for
well-trained dogs. If your dog is young or not used to being
around a lot of other dogs and people, it is not a good idea to
enter a leash-free area.
As your dog’s fitness level increases, you can pick up the
pace. Dogs love to fetch—some breeds can fetch balls, sticks,
or other fun toys for hours without becoming tired. If both
you and your dog are in good shape, you can try jogging or
swimming together. Exercise makes tired dogs and Scouts
happy dogs and Scouts.
Remember: Pooper-scooper laws require owners to
clean up after their pets.
If your dog has a history of medical problems, ask
your veterinarian about an appropriate exercise
program. Remember, whatever exercise program
you pursue, your dog loves to spend time with you,
and you can make that time special!





DOG CARE 49
.Grooming Your Dog
Grooming Your Dog
Just like you, dogs benefit from having their hair brushed
daily. Throughout the day, dirt, bugs, dead skin, and shedding
hair collect in the dog’s coat and the hair can become matted.
A quick daily brushing cleans the hair and prevents tangles. It
also stimulates blood circulation in the skin and distributes the
skin’s natural oils. All of this helps keep your dog’s coat shiny.
If you have a short-haired dog, or a puppy, give it a rub-
down with a soft cloth or a piece of chamois. You can also use
a stiff, short-bristled brush on short-haired adult dogs. Long-
haired dogs will require a wide-toothed comb and a brush with
long bristles. Work out burrs on long-haired dogs with your
thumb and forefinger, or with a metal grooming comb.
Spread a newspaper on the floor to catch the combings.
Place your dog on the paper, and pet and talk to your dog in a
soothing voice until the dog relaxes. Begin working from head
to tail. If your dog is not used to being groomed, keep the
session short. You can gradually increase the time as the dog
becomes more comfortable with grooming.
If you work gently and give a lot of praise, grooming will
be an enjoyable experience for your dog.
Bathing Your Dog
Unless your dog gets really dirty
running around outside, it should
only need a bath about once a
month. More frequent bathing
can dry out a dog’s skin. Puppies
younger than three months
generally should not be bathed.
When you do give your dog
a bath, use warm—never hot or
cold—water. Talk gently to your
dog, giving praise for sitting still.
Begin washing from the tail up.
Long-haired dogs
often have matted
or tangled hair
that may be hard
to brush out. The
trick is to hold the
hair above the
matted part and
gently work at the
bottom of the
tangle with a
brush or comb.
If you cannot
brush it out, the
matted part will
have to be cut
out. Unless
someone in your
household has
experience with
this, have
a groomer or
a veterinarian
remove the tangle.


50 DOG CARE
Grooming Your Dog.
Your dog’s head should be the last thing you
wash because once it gets wet, your dog
will want to shake itself. When you wash
the head, keep soap and water out of
your dog’s ears and eyes. Rinse thor-
oughly with lukewarm water, more
than once if necessary, so that no
soap is left on the dog’s skin.
Dogs can easily catch cold,
so dry your dog after each bath.
This is particularly important for
long-haired dogs whose thick
coats can take a long time to air
dry. You can use a hair dryer to
dry your dog, but make sure the heat and power are set to
low. Otherwise, use heavy towels and keep your dog warm
and away from drafts until completely dry.
Cleaning Ears and Eyes
Inspect your dog’s ears weekly to see if they need cleaning.
If they do, use cotton balls (not swabs) with an ear cleansing
solution for dogs. Wipe all the nooks and crannies you can
see, taking care not to push wax and dirt into the ear canal. Be
very gentle; a dog’s ears are tender. Your dog’s ears probably
will need to be cleaned only once or twice a month.
Eye care is important for breeds with protruding eyes,
such as Cocker Spaniels, Lhasa Apsos, and Pekingese. If the
dog is prone to an eye discharge, wipe it off daily with water-
soaked cotton. Heavy eye discharge might be a sign of disease
and should be checked by your veterinarian.
Trimming Nails
Running and walking outside might keep your dog’s nails
from getting too long, but it probably won’t keep them short
enough. Dewclaws never get worn and will grow quite long.
Overgrown nails are painful for your dog. Check your dog’s
nails regularly and trim as needed, probably every couple
of weeks.
Examine ears
for redness,
discharge, and
parasites as you
clean. Or, if you
see your dog
shaking its head a
lot or pawing at
its ears, take a
closer look.
These symptoms
might indicate
an infection or
other problem that
needs treatment
by a veterinarian.
Never use shampoo made for people on a dog. It
is too strong and will dry out your dog’s skin. Use
shampoo made just for dogs.
Good grooming tools for
your pet, including a brush
and comb, nail clippers, and
dog shampoo, are available
from your pet supplier.


DOG CARE 51
.Grooming Your Dog
Small puppies can be gradually introduced to nail
trimming with the use of a stiff emery board. Do one foot
every day. Food treats may be helpful to get a wiggly puppy to
accept this method of grooming the nails.
On older dogs, use only nail clippers designed for dogs.
Trim only a small bit of the clear part of the nail at a time.
This part is no longer attached to nerves or blood vessels. The
clear part of the nail is sometimes hard to see, and this makes
trimming a little tricky. If you are unsure how to trim your
dog’s nails, ask your veterinarian to show you how.
Dental Care
To prevent dental
problems, brush your
dog’s teeth daily
with toothpaste and
a toothbrush made
specifically for dogs.
This will help prevent
plaque and tartar
buildup. Rawhide
chew toys and hard
foods, such as biscuits, also help keep the teeth clean. Your
veterinarian will take care of the rest with regular teeth clean-
ing as part of your dog’s annual checkup.
A dog with a healthy mouth has pink gums that fit snugly
around white teeth. And a healthy dog’s breath should not
smell bad. If you notice bad breath, yellow teeth, or red and
swollen gums, have your dog’s teeth checked right away. These
symptoms are signs
of gum disease, which
can lead to tooth loss
when left untreated.
Puppy teeth
should fall out as
the permanent
teeth come in.
If you notice a
permanent tooth
coming in around
a puppy tooth that
isn’t loose, take
your puppy to the
veterinarian to
have the puppy
tooth removed.
Dogs should be given
their own toys to chew
and taught not to chew
on other items around
the house.
You can help your dog get used to the idea of nail trim-
ming by regularly handling its feet while grooming.





DOG CARE 53
.Keeping Your Dog Healthy
Keeping Your
Dog Healthy
Soon after you get your dog, have a veterinarian give it a
thorough checkup. A veterinarian will assess your dog’s overall
health by examining its pulse, breathing, urine, stool, ears,
eyes, nose, skin, and coat. The veterinarian can tell you
whether your dog needs deworming or vaccinations.
Vaccinations will protect your dog from highly contagious
diseases that can endanger its life. Your dog should be vacci-
nated against distemper, hepatitis, leptospirosis, parainfluenza
(“kennel cough”), and parvovirus. These five vaccinations
usually are given as one shot. A puppy six to eight weeks old
should be taken to the veterinarian to receive its first shot,
with the vaccination program to continue every three to four
weeks thereafter until the dog is 12 to 16 weeks old. At three
to four months of age, the dog should have a rabies shot, with
yearly boosters thereafter.
Puppies need frequent checkups. This is in part because
of their vaccination schedule, but also because the little dogs
are changing so rapidly. These visits allow the veterinarian to
get a better idea of the puppy’s health as it grows.
Adult dogs should be seen annually. During these visits
the veterinarian examines the dog thoroughly for any changes
that might indicate illness. Your dog’s health condition will
gradually change as your dog ages. The veterinarian can note
these changes and make recommendations for diet and exercise
routines to keep your dog healthy.
Visits will allow you to ask questions about raising
and training your dog. Don’t forget that your veterinarian
deals with dog owners all day, every day, so there is a good
chance the veterinarian will have a ready answer to almost
any question.
Rabies vaccination
laws vary from
state to state. Your
pet’s veterinarian
can tell you
what the law is
in your state.


54 DOG CARE
Keeping Your Dog Healthy.
Spaying and Neutering
In the wild, animals produce offspring to ensure the continua-
tion and survival of the species. Wolves, coyotes, and dingoes
produce large litters of pups to compensate for the high death
rate in their litters from disease and predators. Domesticated
dogs have the potential to produce large litters as often as
twice a year but without the natural controls of disease and
predation. Without some other means of population control,
the pet dog population could quickly become an overwhelming
problem worldwide.
The spaying (or ovariohysterectomy) of a female dog and
neutering (also called castration) of a male dog are two surgical
methods to help control dog populations. Besides eliminating
the overpopulation of unwanted puppies, these surgical
procedures provide many other benefits to an animal’s health.
Spaying a female helps reduce the likelihood of her devel-
oping infections or cancer in the reproductive tract and milk
glands. Neutering a male dog reduces his tendency to roam,
fight, and develop problems in his reproductive tract. Spaying
and neutering are a part of being a responsible pet owner.
Helping control pet overpopulation is everyone’s responsibility.
According to Spay Oklahoma (spayok.com), 70,000 puppies and
kittens are born each day in the United States. Millions of unwanted
dogs, cats, kittens, and puppies are destroyed by animal control
agencies each year. Many thousands more are abandoned. Check this
out: If an unspayed female dog, her mate, and all of their puppies
and the offspring of those puppies were not spayed or neutered, that
would add up to:
Be a responsible pet owner and spay or neuter your dog or cat.
4 years: 2,048 puppies
5 years: 12,288 puppies
6 years: 67,000 puppies
1 year: 16 puppies
2 years: 128 puppies
3 years: 512 puppies


DOG CARE 55
.Keeping Your Dog Healthy
An Ounce of Prevention
You probably will know when your dog is sick because of
changes in its behavior. Your active dog might be listless or
your relaxed one restless. The dog's coat and eyes might lose
their shine. Your dog might stop eating or start drinking a lot
more water than usual. Its gums and tongue might turn pale.
Bowel movements and feces might become irregular.
If you think your dog is sick, take a closer look. Is the
dog’s heart rate elevated? You can a check a dog’s pulse on the
inside of the hind leg, high on the inner thigh near where the
leg meets the belly. Normal pulse rates vary among different
types of dogs. Smaller breeds and toy breeds can have heart
rates that exceed 120 beats per minute. The heart rates of larger
breeds are between 70 and 90 beats per minute.
Common Dog Diseases and Vaccinations
Like humans, dogs are susceptible to all kinds of infections
from fleas, ticks, and worms to viruses and bacterial infections.
Being familiar with some common dog diseases can help you
keep your dog healthy.
WORMS
Worms are parasites that live inside your dog. Hookworms,
roundworms, tapeworms, and whipworms live in the intestines.
Heartworms are found in the bloodstream.
If you got your dog as a puppy, there is a good chance the
puppy had worms when you brought it home. Many puppies
are infected with certain worms from birth. They are transmit-
ted to the puppy from its mother. Worms can prevent your pup
from gaining weight and can cause intestinal upsets. Round-
worms are a common type of worms found in puppies and
also can infect humans during certain stages.
When you first get your puppy, it needs to be dewormed.
To see what kind of worms your puppy might have, take a
sample of the puppy’s stool to the veterinarian. Tests will
determine what type of parasite your puppy may have and
the medication that should be used for treatment. (A stool
sample also can be taken at the veterinarian’s office.)
If your dog
has a fever or
a prolonged,
elevated heart
rate, it needs to
be taken to a
veterinarian.


56 DOG CARE
Keeping Your Dog Healthy.
Do not administer medicines to your dog without first consulting
your veterinarian.
In adult dogs most intestinal parasites are picked up from
the stool of an infected dog (except tapeworms, which are
spread by fleas). Because this can easily happen when dogs
are sniffing around outside, adult dogs should also have a stool
check a couple of times a year to screen for parasitic disease.
Remember, most internal parasites are not visible to the naked
eye, so don’t assume they are not a problem just because you
don’t see them.
Dogs can get heartworms through the bite of a mosquito
that carries the parasite. A dog might be infected for a long
time before you know about it because it takes awhile for
the worms to cause damage to the dog’s heart. Symptoms of
heartworms could include sluggishness and coughing. These
can progress to heart failure, which can cause death.
Heartworm disease can affect dogs in every state.
heartwormsociety.org


DOG CARE 57
.Keeping Your Dog Healthy
It’s a Pill,
but Someone
Has to Do the
Dirty Work!
To give your pup a pill, gently
grasp its muzzle as shown in 1.
Apply some pressure just behind
the canine teeth, squeezing the
lips against the teeth (2); open
the mouth wide. Using your free
hand, place the pill as far back on
the tongue as you can (3). Gently
close the muzzle and hold it shut
until your dog swallows. Massage
the throat using a downward
motion to encourage swallowing
(4). Once your dog has swallowed
the pill, pet it and give it lots
of praise.
You may be able to fool
your pet by disguising the pill in
a favorite treat such as cheese
or peanut butter. Be sure you
check with your veterinarian
first because some medications
should not be given with food.
3
4
2
1


58 DOG CARE
Keeping Your Dog Healthy.
Treatment for heartworms takes a long time and is hard
on the dog. It is better to prevent the infection. Most dogs are
prescribed preventive treatments for heartworms during
mosquito season. If you live in an area of the country where
mosquitoes are a problem throughout the year, your dog
probably will receive preventive treatments year-round.
VIRUSES
Some of the common viral diseases that can infect your dog
are canine distemper, canine parvovirus, and rabies.
Canine distemper is a respiratory viral disease. The virus
is spread from dog to dog through the air and via saliva.
Symptoms of canine distemper include snotty nose and eyes,
coughing, and pneumonia. Later stages may involve the skin,
digestive tract, and nervous system. Canine distemper has a
high fatality rate and in some areas is the number one killer
of dogs. Treatment for canine distemper is often futile and
primarily aimed at supportive care.
Canine distemper is prevented by vaccinations. Puppies
normally receive a series of distemper vaccinations while older
dogs receive annual booster vaccinations.
Canine parvovirus is a digestive disease. It is spread
through the vomit and diarrhea of a sick dog by flies, and
through contaminated shoes, hands, and other objects. The
virus can live outside of the dog and remain infective for a long
period of time. Symptoms of canine parvovirus are vomiting and
diarrhea that are sometimes bloody, leading to dehydration,
shock, and death.
Dogs can be tested for heartworms when they
are six months old. Annual screening and
preventive medication can help protect your
dog from heartworms.


DOG CARE 59
.Keeping Your Dog Healthy
Canine parvovirus is a highly contagious disease. With
supportive treatment, however, an infected dog can survive.
Treatment may be expensive so vaccinations are highly
recommended. As with canine distemper, a series of
vaccinations are given to puppies while adult dogs
receive annual boosters.
Probably the most feared dog disease is rabies, partly
because it can affect humans through a dog bite. Because
rabies infects the brain, it causes extreme personality changes,
such as viciousness and excessive salivation, often described
as “foaming at the mouth.” Biting at inanimate objects and the
inability to swallow also are symptoms of rabies.
If you find your dog sleeping or lying in an unusual
place, such as a closet or under a bed, your dog
might be wounded or sick. When animals don’t feel
well, they often retreat to small, cozy places where
they feel safe.
You can’t license
your dog without a
rabies vaccination,
which the law says
must be adminis-
tered by your
dog’s veterinarian.


60 DOG CARE
Keeping Your Dog Healthy.
Because there is no treatment for this disease (it is
always fatal to dogs!) and it can be passed to humans, rabies
vaccinations for dogs are required by law in all states. Thanks
to these strict vaccination programs and licensing laws,
rabies has been effectively controlled in our domestic animal
population.
OTHER DISEASES
There are other diseases besides canine distemper and canine
parvovirus that are prevented by vaccination. They include
canine infectious hepatitis, leptospirosis, parainfluenza (kennel
cough), bordetella, Lyme disease, and coronavirus (not to
be confused with the human COVID disease). Bordetella is
an upper respiratory infection. Vaccination for this disease is
oftentimes required by boarding and grooming facilities and for
pets attending puppy or adult dog training classes.
Lyme disease is transmitted by ticks carrying an organism
named Borellia burgdorferi. When an infected tick bites your
dog, the Borellia organism passes through the tick’s saliva
into the open wound. Symptoms include fever, joint pain,
fatigue, swollen lymph nodes, and lameness. Prevention is
by vaccination.
Check with your veterinarian on the accepted schedules
for vaccinating your new puppy or
older dog for all of these diseases.
FLEAS AND TICKS
Fleas will make your dog itch and
can infest the inside of your house as
well as your yard. They may also bite
people. Fleas also are the source of
tapeworms in your dog.
Fleas spend virtually their entire
life on the dog. They will initiate feeding
and breeding within eight hours of
finding a dog. They do leave the dog to
jump onto another animal, so treatment
must be directed at the dog as well as
the house and yard and anywhere your
dog hangs out.
There are many forms of flea
control products. Flea collars, sprays,
dips, powders, and topical “spot-
Humans also
can contract Lyme
disease but not
from an infected
dog. People get it
from the bite of an
infected tick just
as a dog does.
Adult male tick
(ACTUAL SIZE)
Adult female tick
(ACTUAL SIZE)


DOG CARE 61
.Keeping Your Dog Healthy
ons” are but a few examples of the numerous choices you
have to control fleas. Be sure to read the warning labels and
instructions for any product you intend to use to make sure it
is safe for your breed of dog. Some pets may be sensitive to
certain products, so ask your veterinarian which products work
best in your area and what is the best type for your pet.
Ticks carry a variety of diseases that infect animals and
humans, such as Lyme disease. Infected dogs can pass Lyme
disease to humans (by “sharing” ticks), so it is very important
to check your dog for ticks after it has been outside, if you live
in or visit an area where ticks are common. Check between
the pads of your dog's feet, too. To be on the safe side, protect
your dog with tick spray before you go out.
Ticks bury their head in the dog’s skin to feed on blood.
They are most commonly found around the ears, head, neck,
and paws. If you see one, spray the tick with tick spray and
then remove it using tweezers. Make sure that the entire tick
is removed, including its mouth. Don’t twist or jerk the tick.
Never use a hot match or similar object to burn a tick off a
dog’s skin.
There are many products available for tick control,
many of which do a good job on fleas as well. Consult your
veterinarian about the best approach for controlling these pests.
Avoid handling
ticks with bare
hands. Use
tweezers or
protect the hands
with latex gloves
or a tissue.
Always wash your
hands thoroughly
and disinfect
the bite site on
the dog after
removing the tick.
Ironically, the most
predominant flea species
associated with dogs in
the United States is
Ctenocephalides felis, which
means cat flea (shown here)—
not Ctenocephalides canis,
which is the dog flea.
In some areas of the country, a Lyme disease
vaccination for your dog may be recommended.





DOG CARE 63
.Dog Emergencies
Dog Emergencies
Preventive care can protect your dog from many accidents.
Start by checking your home to be sure that household
chemicals, automotive supplies, paints, garden pesticides and
fertilizers, and similar threats are out of your dog’s reach.
When you are away from home, unplug electrical cords in
your dog’s confinement area and make sure there is no danger
to your pet from items that are sharp or small enough to be
swallowed. Never let your dog run free or chase cars; build
a fence around the yard and walk your dog only on a leash.
When an accident does happen, knowing basic first aid
can help you act quickly, calmly, and sensibly. Keep telephone
numbers for the veterinarian, pet emergency center, and poison
control center by the phone and in your wallet. You might need
to call a professional for advice.
Handling a Hurt Dog
So what do you do if your dog is injured? Maybe your dog
has swallowed something poisonous, fell, or was hit by a
car. If you know how to react to such a situation, you will
be prepared to act quickly and get your dog the medical
help it needs.
Approach your dog slowly and quietly, speaking in a
comforting tone. A seriously injured dog is frightened and in
pain and might act unpredictably, even biting its owner. So,
before you begin first aid, muzzle the dog. If you do not have
a muzzle, you can improvise one with a long strip of gauze,
a necktie, belt, two handkerchiefs, or a soft rope.
Never leave your dog in the car when the weather
is warm.


64 DOG CARE
Dog Emergencies.
The Dog First-Aid Kit
A good way to prepare for a dog emergency is to put together a dog
first-aid kit. Much of what you will need is already in your home medicine
cabinet. Items to have handy include the following:
Also keep all of your dog’s health records and veterinary emergency
telephone numbers handy.
Over-the-counter medicines for humans should only be adminis-
tered to a dog under the care and watchful eye of an adult and with the
approval of a veterinarian. A good way to proceed is to ask a parent
or guardian to phone your veterinarian before giving any medication
to your pet. Because veterinarians may recommend them, it is a good
idea to keep these medicines in your dog’s first-aid kit:
• Gauze sponges to protect
wounds and burns and to
control bleeding
• Elastic bandage, for wrapping
wounds and muzzling an
injured dog
• Sterile, nonadhesive pads
• Self-adhesive athletic ban-
dage, to temporarily support
or secure limbs
• Adhesive tape, for
securing bandages
• Gauze sponges, for
cleaning wounds
• Rubbing alcohol, a disinfectant
• Hydrogen peroxide (3 percent
solution), to clean wounds and
induce vomiting
• Antibiotic ointment, for
dressing wounds
• Cortisone cream, for minor
allergic reactions and itching
• Activated charcoal, to
absorb poison
• Rectal thermometer
• Petroleum jelly, to
lubricate thermometer
• Eyewash, to flush out eyes
• Nail clippers, to trim cracked
or broken nails
• Bandage scissors
• Tweezers
• Blanket
• Resealable plastic bags
• Syrup of ipecac, to
induce vomiting
• Milk of magnesia, a laxative
• Pepto-Bismol or Kaopectate
tablets, for diarrhea
• Buffered baby aspirin (not ibu-
profen or acetaminophen), to
reduce fever and relieve pain
• Benadryl capsules, for aller-
gies and allergic reactions


DOG CARE 65
.Dog Emergencies
Treating Wounds
If your dog is wounded, it is important not to panic, but it is
also important to act quickly. What you do depends on what
kind of wound the dog has received. Remember to muzzle the
dog before you start.
To move an
injured dog, you
can use an ironing
board, blanket,
jacket, or car
floormat as a
stretcher. Have
someone help you
gently lift the dog
onto the material
you are using and
then lift the
stretcher, with
each of you
holding it at
the corners.
(Be careful that
the dog does
not try to jump
off the stretcher.)
If you don’t have a muzzle, you can make an
emergency one. Use 3 feet of 2-inch gauze.
Make a loose
circle of gauze
around the
dog’s nose
and tie with a
half-knot on
the bridge of
the nose.
Loop the ends back
under the jaw and
tie another half-knot.
Take the long
ends under and
behind the ears
and secure with
a bow.


66 DOG CARE
Dog Emergencies.
If your dog is bleeding, apply a pressure bandage to the
wound. Place sterile gauze pads over the wound and apply
constant direct pressure with your hand. Use gauze strips to
wrap the wound tightly, and tie or tape the ends. Be careful not
to tie the bandage too tight because it could cut off circulation.
If the area below the bandage begins to swell, loosen the
bandage until the swelling subsides. If bandaging is not
available, place a neckerchief or T-shirt on the wound and
press it firmly. Hold it in place until help arrives.
A tourniquet should be applied only if the dog’s life is
in danger, and should only be applied by a knowledgeable
adult. To make a tourniquet, wrap gauze, fabric, or rope twice
around the wounded leg (or the tail), between the heart and
the wound, and knot it. Do not make the tourniquet too tight.
Get the dog to a veterinarian immediately.
In the event of
a serious
wound, always
get your pet to a
veterinarian as
soon as possible.
A tourniquet can cause the loss of the leg or nerve
damage if left in place too long. If medical help is
more than 15 or 20 minutes away, loosen the tour-
niquet every 30 minutes for a couple of minutes at
a time so that blood flow is not completely shut off
from the limb.


DOG CARE 67
.Dog Emergencies
The most common injuries you will treat probably will
be small cuts and bite wounds. These superficial cuts and
wounds should be treated like more serious ones, because in
some cases you won’t be able to tell how deep they are. Clean
them with water and antibiotic ointment, and bandage with
clean gauze, if needed. Once a scab has developed, hydrogen
peroxide can be used to clean the wound. Change the gauze
and reapply antibiotic ointment frequently to prevent infection.
Bandaging
Bandaging helps stop bleeding and protects the wound from
infection and from a dog’s licking and chewing. A bandage
of some kind should be applied to all but the smallest cuts
and abrasions.
To bandage a dog’s foot, cover the wound with gauze
padding. Put cotton balls between each pair of toes, including
the space between the dewclaw and the leg. Wrap the foot in
gauze and wrap tape around that. Do not wrap the bandage
too tight as it will constrict the circulation.
To bandage a dog’s leg, cover the wound with gauze
padding and secure with adhesive tape. Wrap tape all the way
around the leg, covering the wound completely. Do not wrap
the bandage too tight. If the dog can’t flex its leg, or if its nails
lose color or toes become cold, loosen the bandage.
To bandage the chest and abdomen, make a many-tailed
bandage. Cut three or four slits into two sides of a square or
rectangular piece of linen to make “tails.” Tie the tails over
the dog’s back to hold the bandage in place. This emergency
bandage allows for a snug fit along the curve of the dog’s
chest and abdomen. It is useful for keeping gauze pads in
place over a
belly or chest
wound and
for preventing
a dog from
scratching at or
chewing on the
pads.
Always wash
your hands
before and after
handling a wound
or changing
a dressing.
Many-tailed
bandage


68 DOG CARE
Dog Emergencies.
Dog Bite
Dogs fight. If another dog bites yours, treat the wound as you
would any puncture wound and consult your veterinarian.
Alert your parents or guardian. Be aware of the potential of
disease. In some areas of the country rabies is a concern. If
your dog is properly vaccinated, it is protected, but the dog
that bit yours could bite other dogs or a person. Do you know
which dog bit yours? If not, you may need to find out. Ask
around, but be cautious; a biting dog is dangerous.
If you can determine which dog bit yours, alert the owner
and, if the damage to your dog was serious, alert police and
animal control officials.
The Elizabethan Collar
Dogs tend to chew on their bandages. An
Elizabethan collar can protect the wound
from the dog and help the healing process.
The collar looks silly and awkward, but a
dog can get used to wearing one.
You can purchase a plastic Elizabethan
collar, or you can make one out of card-
board or lightweight plastic wastebas-
kets and buckets. Make sure the collar
fits around the dog’s neck and reaches
outward far enough to prevent the dog’s
mouth from reaching the wound. It should
be short enough to let the dog eat and
drink. However, it can be removed during mealtimes.
To make a cardboard collar, cut out a large circle with a hole in
the middle. Then make a pie-shaped cut in the side. It should look
something like a doughnut with a bite taken out of the side. Overlap
the ends. Punch holes in the ends so you can lace string or a shoestring
to secure the collar.
To make a “bucket” collar from lightweight plastic wastebaskets
or buckets, cut just enough out of the bottom to let the dog’ s head
slip through. Fasten the device to the dog’s collar with strings passed
through holes punched in the sides of the plastic.


DOG CARE 69
.Dog Emergencies
Naughty Nibbles
Though most dogs are trusted and loyal pets, sometimes in defense
even good dogs bite people. In fact, in a given year millions of Americans
are bitten. Since dog owners are responsible for their dog’s behavior,
you should do everything you can to prevent a dog bite before it
happens. Keep your dog on a leash or under your watchful eye at
all times. Abide by state and local laws in restraining your pet.
Train your dog, and keep an especially close eye if a young child
approaches your dog. Your dog may not understand the child’s inten-
tions, and the child may not properly judge your dog’s temperament.
And don’t forget that your dog’s head and the child’s face may be at
about the same height, making dog bites especially nasty for kids.
If your dog bites someone, notify your parents or guardian at once
and do everything you can to assist the injured person.
FIRST AID FOR A DOG BITE TO A DOG
Consider all bite wounds to be contaminated with dirt or bacteria.
• Clean the wound with absorbent cotton soaked in
hydrogen peroxide.
• Apply a tincture of iodine.
• If the wound is still bleeding, apply a cotton gauze pad and
pressure to try to stop bleeding.
• Bandage over the gauze pad with an elastic bandage firmly
but not too firmly.
FIRST AID FOR A DOG BITE TO A PERSON
Again, consider all bite wounds to be contaminated.
• Wash the area with soapy water then flush with lukewarm
water for five minutes.
• Apply pressure with a clean towel to the injured part to stop
the bleeding.
• Keep the injury elevated above the level of the heart to slow
swelling and bleeding and to help prevent infection.
• Dry and cover the injury with a sterile dressing.
• Consult a physician. This is important.
• If the bite is severe, call an ambulance.
• Report the incident to the police or animal control.
While many bite
wounds appear
to be superficial,
there can be
considerable
damage below
the surface of
the skin. Take
your dog to your
veterinarian.


70 DOG CARE
A Scout’s Best Ol’ Friend.
A Scout’s Best Ol’ Friend
By now you know what it takes to be a caring and responsible
dog owner. As your puppy matures and grows older, its physical
needs and abilities will change, too. It’s important that you
be attentive to your dog's needs not only in puppyhood, but
also through the years when it becomes a “senior citizen” and,
later on, geriatric. Regular veterinary checkups will help you
accomplish this responsibility to your pet.
Like many other pet owners who consider their dog an
important part of their family, you will want to make sure
your dog is happy, healthy, and content. Always pay attention
to subtle changes in eating habits, weight, and day-to-day
patterns. As your dog ages, you may notice a change in its
behavior, as well.
Paying close attention to
your pet—whatever its age—and
keeping your pet healthy will help
ensure you enjoy many happy
years together.
If you are looking for an
older purebred dog or
want to rescue a homeless
animal, visit the American
Kennel Club’s website at
akc.org. Most of the AKC’s
national breed clubs have
a breed rescue function
to help connect homeless
pets with loving homes.


DOG CARE 71
.A Scout’s Best Ol’ Friend
Age Analogy Chart*
The chart shown here will help you determine your pet’s relative age in
human years.
*This information is reproduced here with permission from the Belmont Veterinary Center,
Lincoln, Nebraska.
Pet’s Animal Size (in pounds)
Age 0–20 21–50 51–90 +90
1 7 7 8 9
2 15 16 17 18
3 22 23 25 26
4 29 30 32 34
5 36 37 40 42
6 40 41 45 49
7 44 47 50 56
8 48 51 55 64
9 52 56 61 71
10 56 60 66 78
11 60 65 72 86
12 64 69 77 93
13 68 74 82 101
14 72 78 88 108
15 76 83 93 115
16 80 87 99 123
17 84 92 104
18 88 96 109
19 92 101 115 Senior
20 96 105 120 Geriatric





DOG CARE 73
.Careers Working With Dogs
Careers Working
With Dogs
Many dogs have jobs. Because of their intelligence, trainability,
adaptability, and highly developed sense of smell and sight,
dogs of different breeds and mixed breeds can be cross-trained
to perform various tasks. For every job a dog has, there is a
job for a person. Training is the basis of these interrelated dog
and human careers.
Professional dog trainers train dogs to respond to
commands and instruct people to train and handle their dogs.
A trainer loves and owns dogs and has lots of experience
teaching them. A trainer should be very patient and have the
ability to communicate with dogs and with their owners or
handlers. Many trainers are self-educated. No formal education
is necessary to learn how to train. Some find experienced
trainers to guide them, or they learn to work with a variety of
dogs by volunteering in a shelter, animal hospital, kennel, or
pet store. Others get their training at a dog obedience school.
A trainer trains a dog. A handler handles a dog. As
a dog owner, you can be the trainer and the handler.
Depending on what you want your dog to do, you
may hire someone to take charge of your dog.


74 DOG CARE
Careers Working With Dogs.
A trainer who is accomplished at basic and advanced
obedience training may choose to specialize in a certain area,
such as training dogs to detect drugs or bombs, locate endangered
wildlife, or perform on TV. The trainer also teaches the handler
how to train the dog because the two must work as a team. The
professional masters this special training and should be licensed
or certified by a credible national organization.
There are many positions available to people who love
dogs and are committed to working with them daily.
Assistance/Service
Guide or Seeing Eye dog trainers train a dog to assist a
blind or visually impaired person. After the dog has learned
basic obedience and socialization skills, the trainer teaches the
dog to navigate around obstacles in its path, to stop at street
curbs, and to be cautious near traffic. Once a dog is matched
with an individual, the trainer trains the dog and its handler to
work together as a team to ensure their safety. When training
is complete, the team is certified and the guide dog is allowed
to accompany its handler in all public areas.
Hearing dog trainers train a dog to assist a deaf or hearing-
impaired individual.
Service dog trainers train a dog to assist a person who
has a disability other than a visual or hearing impairment.
Therapy dog trainers help train dogs to provide affection
and comfort to people in hospitals, retirement homes, nursing
homes, schools, hospice, and disaster areas, as well as to
patients with conditions such as depression, autism, and the
effects of post-traumatic stress disorder.
Dog Care
Dog groomers take care of the appearance of a dog. The
groomer must be familiar with breed profile guidelines and
proficient in grooming and scissoring skills. Certification is
voluntary, but may be important to the client. Groomers style
dogs for dog shows, appearances, photographs, and comfort.
The groomer also can identify skin diseases and parasites.
Many groomers are self-employed, working from
home, their shop, or a mobile grooming vehicle.


DOG CARE 75
.Careers Working With Dogs
Veterinarians are doctors who treat dogs as well as other
kinds of animals. Some of the tasks of a veterinarian include
spaying and neutering, vaccinating, performing surgery,
diagnosing illnesses, and, sadly, euthanizing a pet. If you want
to be a veterinarian, you must complete four years of college
(with an emphasis on biology and chemistry) plus four more
years of full-time study at an accredited veterinary school to
earn a doctor of veterinary medicine (DVM) degree.
Entertainment and Performance
Dog actor/entertainer trainers train dogs to perform reliably in
front of a camera or live audience. The trainer teaches advanced
commands (such as “go to your mark” or “speak”) and trains
the dog to jump through hoops to succeed at the casting call.
The trainer prepares the dog to pose for photographs, act in
commercials, movies, and television shows, or perform tricks in
circuses and state fairs.
Security and Law Enforcement
K-9 officers work with a trained detection dog to find illegal
drugs, bombs and explosives, concealed weapons, contraband,
and smuggled people. Police K-9 officers also use trained dogs
to apprehend criminals who attempt to flee. Military K-9
handlers use these detection dogs in the same way that police
officers do, but also for patrol and security sweeps and as
sentry dogs in a war zone. K-9 officers come from the ranks
of regular police officers or military security forces. A military
K-9 handler must go through basic training and Security
Forces Tech School. The handler cross-trains with the military
working dog (MWD) program.
U. S. Customs and Border Protection canine handlers
work as a team with a dog trained to detect concealed persons
and controlled substances in order to deter illegal activity at
our nation’s borders. The detection team searches for smuggled
currency, people, narcotics, firearms, and agricultural products
that must be quarantined. A detection dog is required to retire
at 9 years old. Handlers often take their retired partners home
as pets.
K-9 units are trained
by professionals.
Then the K-9
officer must pass
an examination
before taking over
the responsibility
for the dog.


76 DOG CARE
Careers Working With Dogs.
Sport
Dog sled mushers run a team of sled dogs. Mushers often
breed, raise, and train their dogs to work together as a team.
Many mushers own kennels because they have to care for five
or more dogs year-round. Dog sledding used to be a common
form of transportation, but it is now generally a racing sport.
The best way to learn how to mush is to work as a handler or
guide for an experienced musher.
Hunting dog trainers train dogs to help hunters locate
and retrieve shot birds or game. Certain breeds track by scent
(hunting); others hunt by sight (coursing). Some breeds are
natural flushers, pointers, or retrievers. The trainer teaches the
hunting dog to track and trail, to point to indicate the presence
of the hunting target, to mark or spot the target when shot, and
to retrieve. To learn how to train hunting dogs, learn about what
breeds are best for the task. Work with an experienced trainer,
observe other hunters in action with their experienced dogs,
and train your own hunting dogs.
Work
Conservation dog handlers work with a dog trained to
detect specific scents in the wild in order to locate endangered
species, track a new pack of predators, or identify invasive
plants. The handler and dog team are called in to help
wildlife game managers, biologists, and ecologists manage
the populations of certain feral animals that threaten humans
or livestock, find rare plants and small animals, and control
weeds that may overwhelm the natural habitat.
Herding dog trainers train dogs to move livestock
efficiently with the least possible stress. The trainer works with
a dog to develop its natural herding instincts and abilities to
its full potential. The trainer works regularly with stock (such
as sheep or cattle) and knows how to anticipate intended
movement when a dog is rounding up the animals. The trainer
gives commands to the dog by voice and whistle. To learn how
to train, attend training clinics as a spectator, watch trainers at
herding trials, and observe how livestock is moved on a farm
or ranch.
A musher’s goal
is to race across
Alaska in the
Iditarod, a
1,000-mile test
of human and
dog endurance.


DOG CARE 77
.Careers Working With Dogs
Search and rescue dog handlers train a handler and
a dog as a team to find living victims. The handler is often
matched with a dog qualified for this task. The handler must
be committed to training constantly with the dog and be will-
ing to learn. The dog must have a high drive and a good nose,
and be obedient and agile. The dog should be certified to attest
to its advanced level of proficiency. Professional trainers will
prepare the handler and the dog for specialized search and
rescue tasks. In the event of a disaster—when buildings
collapse because of an earthquake, hurricane, or explosion—
search and rescue dog teams are called to the site to locate
people buried under the rubble. Other search and rescue
missions involve finding someone missing in the wilderness,
in a body of water, or under snow.
You can have a career with dogs—no matter what
your interests are. Besides the ones mentioned above,
you can pursue other fields and tailor them to include
dogs. Write about dogs. Photograph dogs. Invent
medical devices for dogs. Or you can just simply
enjoy your own pet.


78 DOG CARE
Dog Care Resources.
Scouting Literature
Animal Science, Bird Study, Fish and
Wildlife Management, Horsemanship,
Mammal Study, Pets, Reptile and
Amphibian Study, and Veterinary
Medicine merit badge pamphlets
Books
The American Kennel Club. The
Complete Dog Book 19th Edition
Revised. John Wiley, 1997.
Burnford, Sheila. The Incredible
Journey. Lareleaf, 1996.
Coppinger, Raymond, and Lorna
Coppinger. Dogs. Scribner, 2001.
Fogle, Bruce. The New Encyclopedia of
the Dog. DK Publishing, 2000.
Hausman, Gerald, and Loretta
Hausman. The Mythology of Dogs.
St. Martin’s, 1998.
Kjelgaard, Jim. Snow Dog. Bantam
Skylark, 1983.
London, Jack. The Call of the Wild.
Prentice Hall, 1995.
Mammato, Bobbie. Pet First Aid: Cats
and Dogs. American National Red
Cross and the Humane Society of
the United States, 1997.
Serpell, James, editor. The Domestic Dog.
Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Sheldon, Jennifer W. Wild Dogs: The
Natural History of the Nondomestic
Canidae. Academic Press, 1997.
Terhune, Albert Payson. Best Loved Dog
Stories of Albert Payson Terhune.
Amerson, 1987.
Thurston, Mary Elizabeth. The Lost History
of the Canine Race. Avon, 1997.
Wells, Rosemary. Lassie Come-Home.
Henry Holt, 1998.
Zink, M. Christine. Dog Health &
Nutrition for Dummies. John
Wiley, 2001.
Organizations and Websites
American Humane
1400 16th Street NW, Suite 360
Washington, DC 20036
800-227-4645
americanhumane.org
The American Kennel Club
212-696-8200
akc.org
Dog Care Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


DOG CARE 79
.Dog Care Resources
American Society for the Prevention
of Cruelty to Animals
424 East 92nd St.
New York, NY 10128-6804
212-876-7700
aspca.org
Dog Breed Info Center
dogbreedinfo.com
Dog Owner’s Guide
canismajor.com/dog
The Kennel Club
thekennelclub.org.uk
Pet of the Day
petoftheday.com
Spay Oklahoma
227 East Apache St.
Tulsa, OK 74106
918-728-3144
spayok.com
SPAY/USA
25 Davis Ave.
Port Washington, NY 11050
800-248-7729
spayusa.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Rob
Hilsenroth, DVM, executive director
of the American Zoo and Wildlife
Veterinarians Association, for his time
and expertise devoted to the Dog Care
merit badge pamphlet.
Thanks also to National Merit
Badge Subcommittee member Steve
Bowen, D.V.M., for taking a special
interest in this updated edition and
providing his time and expertise to help
make the pamphlet fun, appealing, and
enriching. Dr. Bowen has retired from
active practice and is living in Montana.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
American Heartworm Society,
courtesy—page 56
American Kennel Club, courtesy—
pages 18–23 (all photos in “Dog
Breeds and Characteristics” chapter)
Maria Eisner, Cornell University,
courtesy—page 61
Getty Images—page 30
Gary Kramer, U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, courtesy—page 7
Officer David Lim, New York Police
Department, courtesy—page 39
U.S. Postal Service, ©2001. All rights
reserved.—page 43 (dog stamps)
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the prop-
erty of or are protected by Scouting
America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 9, 27, 60, 65, and 68
Brian Payne—cover (dog with ban-
dages); pages 24, 31, 33, 34, 35,
36, 37, 41, 46 (tossing ball, walking
dog), 49, 51 (brushing teeth), 52, 57
(giving dog a pill), 59, 62, 66, 67,
and 70


80 DOG CARE
Appendix.
1878
Pointer
Retriever (Chesapeake Bay)
Spaniel (Clumber)
Spaniel (Cocker)
Setter (English)
Setter (Gordon)
Setter (Irish)
Spaniel (Irish Water)
Spaniel (Sussex)
1885
Basset Hound
Beagle
Bloodhound
Bull Terrier
Collie
Dachshund
Fox Terrier
Greyhound
Harrier
Irish Terrier
Mastiff
Pug
Saint Bernard
Scottish Terrier
Yorkshire Terrier
1886
Bedlington Terrier
Bulldog
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
English Toy Spaniel
Foxhound (American)
Italian Greyhound
Manchester Terrier (Toy)
Newfoundland
Scottish Deerhound
1887
Great Dane
Manchester Terrier (Standard)
Poodle
Skye Terrier
Wirehaired Pointing Griffon
1888
Airedale Terrier
Dalmatian
Japanese Chin
Maltese
Old English Sheepdog
Pomeranian
Welsh Terrier
Whippet
1891
Borzoi
1893
Boston Terrier
Through 2022, the American Kennel Club had registered 200 dog breeds,
with more recognized nearly every year. This chart lists all AKC recognized
breeds and the year they first became registrable with the AKC.


DOG CARE 81
1894
Spaniel (Field)
1897
Irish Wolfhound
1898
French Bulldog
1903
Chow Chow
1904
Boxer
Chihuahua
Schipperke
Standard Schnauzer
1906
Pekingese
Samoyed
1908
Doberman Pinscher
German Shepherd Dog
West Highland White Terrier
1909
Foxhound (English)
Otterhound
1910
Brussels Griffon
Spaniel (English Springer)
1911
Sealyham Terrier
Shetland Sheepdog
1912
Belgian Sheepdog
1913
Cairn Terrier
Norwegian Elkhound
1914
Spaniel (Welsh Springer)
1915
Papillon
Retriever (Flat-Coated)
1917
Retriever (Labrador)
1922
Kerry Blue Terrier
1924
Retriever (Curly-Coated)
1925
Miniature Pinscher
Retriever (Golden)
1926
Afghan Hound
Miniature Schnauzer
1927
Saluki
1928
Briard
1930
Border Terrier
Giant Schnauzer
Keeshond
Pointer (German Shorthaired)
Siberian Husky
.Appendix


82 DOG CARE
1931
Bouvier des Flandres
Kuvasz
Rottweiler
1933
Great Pyrenees
1934
Brittany
Bullmastiff
Lakeland Terrier
Welsh Corgi (Pembroke)
1935
Alaskan Malamute
Lhasa Apso
Welsh Corgi (Cardigan)
1936
Affenpinscher
American Staffordshire Terrier
Norwich Terrier
Puli
1937
Bernese Mountain Dog
Komondor
1940
Spaniel (American Water)
1943
Weimaraner
1944
Basenji
1945
Black and Tan Coonhound
1946
Spaniel (English Cocker)
1955
Rhodesian Ridgeback
1959
Belgian Malinois
Belgian Tervuren
Pointer (German Wirehaired)
Silky Terrier
1960
Australian Terrier
Vizsla
1969
Shih Tzu
1972
Akita
Bichon Frise
1973
Soft Coated Wheaten Terrier
Tibetan Terrier
1974
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
1976
Bearded Collie
1978
Ibizan Hound
1979
Norfolk Terrier
1980
Australian Cattle Dog
1983
Pharaoh Hound
Portuguese Water Dog
Tibetan Spaniel
Appendix.


DOG CARE 83
1990
Petit Basset Griffon Vendéen
1991
Australian Shepherd
Chinese Crested
Finnish Spitz
Miniature Bull Terrier
1992
Chinese Shar-Pei
1992
Shiba Inu
1994
American Eskimo Dog
1995
Border Collie
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
Greater Swiss Mountain Dog
1996
Anatolian Shepherd
Havanese
Löwchen
1997
Canaan Dog
1997
Parson Russell Terrier
2000
Spinone Italiano
2001
Polish Lowland Sheepdog
2003
German Pinscher
Nova Scotia Duck Trolling
Retriever
Toy Fox Terrier
2004
Black Russian Terrier
Glen of Imaal Terrier
Neapolitan Mastiff
2006
Plott
Tibetan Mastiff
2007
Beauceron
Swedish Vallhund
2008
Dogue de Bordeaux
2009
Bluetick Coonhound
Boykin Spaniel
Irish Red & White Setter
Norwegian Buhund
Pyrenean Shepherd
Redbone Coonhound
2010
Cane Corso
Icelandic Sheepdog
Leonberger
2011
American English Coonhound
Cesky Terrier
Entlebucher Mountain Dog
Finnish Lapphund
Norwegian Lundehund
Xoloitzcuintli
2012
Russell Terrier
Treeing Walker Coonhound
.Appendix


2013
Chinook
Portuguese Podengo Pequeno
Rat Terrier
2014
Coton de Tulear
Wirehaired Vizsla
2015
Bergamasco
Berger Picard
Boerboel
Cirneco dell’Etna
Lagotto Romagnolo
Miniature American Shepherd
Spanish Water Dog
2016
American Hairless Terrier
Pumi
Sloughi
2018
Grand Basset Griffon Vendéen
Nederlandse Kooikerhondje
2019
Azawakh
2020
Barbet
Dogo Argentino
Belgian Laekenois
2021
Biewer Terrier
2022
Bracco Italiano
Mudi
Russian Toy
Appendix.