COOKING
STEM-Based


COOKING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to Counselor
Cooking is a life skills merit badge. It is expected that the
completion of this merit badge may take a longer period of time
than some of the other merit badges. The counselor should
keep the following in mind:
• The meals for this merit badge may be planned, prepared,
and cooked at different times. The goal is for the Scout to
understand each phase of meal planning by working on one
part of the process at a time. The meals planned and cooked
for this merit badge may not count for any other merit badge
or rank advancement.
• These requirements and the content of the Cooking merit
badge pamphlet were developed for the Boy Scouts of
America for use within the United States of America.
Adjustments should be made if traveling internationally.
Scouts working on this badge in summer camp should plan
around food they can get at the camp commissary.
• The first aid–related information found in this pamphlet is a
condensed version of that found in other BSA publications.
The counselor should be familiar with the additional
information on cooking and safety relevant to cooking found
in the Scouts BSA handbooks, Guide to Safe Scouting, First
Aid merit badge pamphlet, and BSA Fieldbook.
35879
ISBN 978-0-8395-3349-8
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing


COOKING 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Cooking or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


4 COOKING


COOKING 5


6 COOKING


Contents
Cooking Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Meals at Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Camp Cooking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Choosing What to Eat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Food Health and Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Careers in the Food Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Menus and Recipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
The Cook’s Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Resources for Cooking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





Cooking Basics
Most people appreciate good food and the comfort of a deli-
cious home-cooked meal. Many Scouts know the fun of enjoy-
ing a tasty cookout after a rigorous day in the outdoors.
Learning how to prepare and cook foods in a safe and healthy
manner is a life skill you can learn now and enjoy for life.
With a little planning and practice, you can easily turn
everyday ingredients into a healthy meal. Learning to cook gives
you a new respect for the process, those who have prepared
meals for you, and the meal itself. Best of all, when we prepare
healthy foods in a healthy manner we may lessen the risk of ill-
ness and for chronic disease and may add years to our life.
Cooking is fun and rewarding—especially when the compliments
pour in and you hear requests for second helpings.
The Cooking merit badge will introduce you to the basics
of cooking that can be used both at home and in the outdoors.
You will learn about food safety, nutritional guidelines, meal
planning, and methods of food preparation for the home and
camp settings. Explore the variety of recipes provided, and use
them to practice the skills you learn.
Safety With Fire and Heat
Wherever you are cooking, there is always a risk to you, to
others nearby, and to your environment. Here are some tips to
help stay safe while cooking.
• Turn pan handles toward the back of the stove so hot pots
and pans will not accidentally be bumped.
• Keep items that could easily catch fire, like pot holders and
dish towels, away from the stove and fire source.
A simple definition
of cooking can
be putting
together three
components—
uncooked food,
utensils, and
heat to create
tasty and
nourishing meals.
If you discover cooking piques your interest beyond what
the Cooking merit badge covers, consider the wide
variety of culinary (or cooking) careers available. Several
of these positions can be found in the careers chapter.
COOKING 9
.Cooking Basics


• Never use a wet oven mitt or towel to
handle something hot. The water can turn
to steam and burn you. Steam is hotter
than boiling water.
• Keep a charged fire extinguisher (either a
class B or K rating will do) nearby, and
know how to use it.
• Wipe up any grease spills immediately.
• To safely smother a pan fire, smother it
with a lid or cookie sheet. Never use
water on a grease fire—doing so could
spread the fire.
• If there is an oven fire, close the oven door and turn off
the oven.
• Wear close-fitting clothes (no loose long sleeves, for
example) to reduce the chances of their catching fire.
• Use caution when moving heavy pots of hot liquid.
• When frying foods, be cautious of the splatter from the
hot grease.
• Keep younger children away from the cooking area, and
closely supervise them if they are present. Do not allow
horseplay in the cooking area.
A fire extinguisher
is a must in a well-
equipped kitchen.
Learn how to use
yours before an
accident occurs.
For more informa-
tion about fire
safety, see the
Fire Safety merit
badge pamphlet.
Residences are required by
law to have a working fire
alarm or smoke detector. A
fire alarm emits a very loud
siren to alert occupants when
smoke is present. These
alarms typically are installed
up high, near the ceiling,
where smoke can first be
detected. If the ones in your
home are battery operated, be
sure to change their batteries
regularly, such as during a
springtime holiday and again
during a fall holiday.
10 COOKING
Cooking Basics.


Safe Food Storage and Transportation
Whether you are cooking at home or at camp, some basic rules
apply. All food must be stored at safe temperatures and cooked
to proper temperatures to limit the risk of illness. When prepar-
ing food, keep in mind the concept of cross-contamination (see
“First Aid, Foodborne Illnesses, and Food-Related Conditions”)
and how it affects cooking routines at home and at camp.
Cross-contamination, a leading cause of foodborne ill-
nesses, can easily be prevented by careful food preparation and
good hygiene. Cross-contamination happens when harmful
bacteria is spread from person to person, person to an object
(such as food), or object to a person. During all stages of food
preparation, practice good habits such as washing your hands
frequently with soap and water, washing produce, and
keeping work surfaces clean.
In this pamphlet are many routines for the proper
handling, cooking, and storage of food. Practicing all those
guidelines will greatly decrease the chances of you or your
diners becoming sick from a food-related illness.
Check the safety
seal. When you
purchase food in
jars, make sure
the safety seal on
the lid is intact.
What’s in a Date
You have probably seen information on a carton of milk or cereal box
related to when the milk or cereal should be consumed. On some
products, that information isn’t always so obvious. Here are some
general guidelines.
• A “sell by” date tells stores how long to display the product for sale.
It is not an indication of how long the product will last in your
home refrigerator.
• A “best if used by (or before)”
date is recommended for best
flavor or quality. It is not a
purchase or safety date.
• A “use by” date is the last date
recommended for use of the
product while at peak quality.
The manufacturer of the prod-
uct determines this date.
COOKING 11
.Cooking Basics


Clean as You Go
Develop good habits in the
kitchen. Clean pans, pots,
utensils, and your working
surfaces as you go. Dishes are
easier to wash when you
clean them soon after you use
them. Keeping the home or
camp kitchen clean as you
cook has other advantages.
• It keeps the cooking
area safer.
• It helps prevent cross con-
tamination and the chance
of foodborne illness.
• It makes your cooking
experience calmer and
more organized.
• It makes cleanup a breeze
when you are finished cooking and eating.
It is no fun when you have muffins ready to come out of the oven
and you cannot find a pot holder because it was not put back where it
belongs. If you use what is handy, such as a dish towel, you stand a good
chance of getting burned. Cleaning and putting things back where they
belong as you go will eliminate these hassles because everything will be
in its place when you need it.
Always use an antibacterial cleaner to wipe up spills from meat pack-
aging or from raw meat. Do not cut meat on the same surface you use to
cut up vegetables and other foods, even if the surface is clean.
To plan ahead and minimize cleanup as much as possible, keep a sink
about half full of warm, soapy water while preparing meals. This makes it
quick and easy to keep your hands clean as you work with various foods,
such as raw meats.
12 COOKING
Cooking Basics.


Clean, Separate, Cook, Chill
Cooking requires planning and attention to detail to keep safety
first. Cooking also calls for good habits at home or in the out-
doors to help prevent cross-contamination and foodborne illness.
CLEAN
At home. Wash hands with soap and warm water
before and after handling raw food. Handwashing
is the best way to reduce the spread of germs and
help prevent cross-contamination. Thoroughly
wash and rinse utensils, cutting boards, and countertops with
soap and hot water. Wash fruits and vegetables thoroughly under
running water just before eating, cutting, or cooking. Always use
hot soapy water or an antibacterial cleaner to wipe up spills from
raw foods such as meat, poultry, seafood, and eggs.
At camp. Pack disposable wipes for hands and quick cleanups.
If you will not have running water available, bring treated water
with you. Remember to bring soap. Use the three-pot method
for cleanup. (See “Camp Cooking.”)
SEPARATE
At home. Keep raw eggs, meat, poultry, seafood,
and their juices away from ready-to-eat food. Use a
separate cutting board for foods (meat vs. fresh
vegetables) from one used for ready-to-eat products
to avoid transferring bacteria. You can also use different colored
cutting boards to keep known food allergens separate. Never put
cooked food back on the same plate that previously held raw
food unless the plate has first been washed in hot, soapy water.
At camp. Store raw meat, poultry, and seafood in containers or
in sealed plastic bags. This will keep their juices, which may
contain harmful bacteria, from dripping onto and possibly
contaminating other foods. Sauce used to marinate raw meat,
poultry, or seafood should not be used on cooked foods unless
the sauce is brought to a boil just before using.
Handwashing
should be done
for at least 20
seconds, or the
time it takes to
sing “Happy
Birthday” twice
to yourself.
COOKING 13
.Cooking Basics
Make sure the work area is clean and uncluttered
before you begin. Clean pans, pots, utensils, and
working surfaces often, since they are easier to wash
sooner than later. Use antibacterial cleaner to wipe up
spills, especially raw meat. A clean and uncluttered
kitchen, indoors or out, makes your cooking experience
safer, calmer and more organized.


COOK
At home. Use a food thermometer to ensure
meat, poultry, seafood, and egg products
have been cooked to a safe minimum internal
temperature that will destroy any harmful
bacteria. Color and texture are NOT reliable indicators of safely
cooked food.
At camp. Be sure to include a food thermometer on your
camping equipment list. Always use a food thermometer to
check for doneness. Color is not a reliable indicator of done-
ness, and especially in camp, it can be tricky to tell the color of
food if you are cooking in a wooded area in the evening.
Heat hot dogs
until they are
steaming hot,
and reheat any
leftovers to
165 degrees F.
Be sure to clean
the thermometer
with hot,
soapy water.
You can learn more about safe minimum cooking tem-
peratures by visiting (with your parent’s permission) the
U.S. Department of Agriculture’s food safety website.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration also has a toll-
free telephone for safe food information: 888-723-3366.
See the resources section.
Place instant-read and digital thermometers in the thickest part
of the food, away from bone, fat, or gristle, in order to get an
accurate temperature reading.
14 COOKING
Cooking Basics.


CHILL
At home. The temperature in a refrigerator
should be 40 degrees F or colder; the freezer
should be 0 degrees F or colder. Do not leave
food at room temperature for more than two
hours (one hour when the temperature is above 90 degrees F).
Regardless of the sell-by date on the package, freeze any fresh
poultry, fish, or ground meat that will not be used within two
days, and use whole cuts of meat within five days. Food can
be thawed in the refrigerator and either refrozen or used within
two days.
Refrigerate leftovers right away. Divide large pots of food,
like soup or stew, into shallow containers. Cut cooked meat or
poultry into smaller portions or slices. Place in shallow contain-
ers and cover to cool quickly. Keep the refrigerator clean, and
discard any leftovers after three days.
Refrigerator Storage of Fresh or Uncooked Products
Poultry 1 or 2 days
Beef, veal, pork, lamb 3 to 5 days
Ground meat, ground poultry 1 or 2 days
Fresh variety meats (liver, tongue,
brain, kidneys, heart, chitterlings)
1 or 2 days
Cured ham (cook before eating) 3 to 5 days
Sausage from pork, beef, turkey,
uncooked
1 or 2 days
Eggs 3 to 5 weeks
If thawed in the
microwave or in
water in the
kitchen sink, food
must be cooked
immediately.
COOKING 15
.Cooking Basics


At camp. Before packing a cooler, refrigerate or freeze the food
overnight. Blocks of ice will keep food colder than ice cubes.
Include an appliance thermometer in your cooler to ensure
it maintains a safe temperature of 40 degrees F or colder.
At the campsite, insulate the cooler with a blanket or a tarp.
If possible, bring one cooler for drinks and snacks and another
for perishable foods. The drink cooler will be opened and
closed often, which lets hot air in and causes ice to melt faster.
Tools and Equipment
Good cooks know that using the right tools—and using them
correctly—will help make you a better, safer, and more efficient
cook. For example, it helps to know when and how to use a
whisk, spatula, and vegetable peeler. Sharp knives must be
used properly to prevent serious cuts and injuries. Pots on a
stove or campfire get extremely hot and must be handled with
hot-pot tongs or pot holders to prevent burns.
Proper food storage helps prevent bacteria from forming.
16 COOKING
Cooking Basics.


As you cook, you often need to reuse the same equip-
ment. For example, you might use a mixer for the cake
batter, so clean the mixer blades right away because
you will need them as soon as the cake cools to
make frosting.
Some pots are very thick
and heavy by design,
such as the Dutch oven.
Transport these heavy
pots carefully. Dropping
such a pot—even an
empty one—could cause
serious injury if it landed
on someone’s foot.
Never grab a pot handle without first protecting your hands.
COOKING 17
.Cooking Basics





Meals at Home
It is hard to beat the satisfaction of preparing great food for
yourself and your family and friends. With good planning and
preparation before you start cooking, you will be able to suc-
cessfully prepare healthy and delicious meals at home.
Steps for Planning and Preparing
Meals at Home
1. Determine when you will be cooking and the types of
meals you will be preparing.
2. Find out whom you will be cooking for and whether
anyone has any special dietary needs.
3. Select recipes using the current USDA
nutrition model (discussed later on) as
a guideline.
4. Make a list of foods required for the
meals, then create a shopping list
based on the ingredients you
will need.
5. Create and follow a timetable
for the preparation of each meal.
Take time to
prepare meals
without rushing.
Always give
yourself enough
time to cook
carefully. Clean as
you go, and as
you cook, practice
what you have
learned about
how to help
prevent cross-
contamination.
COOKING 19
.Meals at Home


Patience is an important quality in learning to cook.
Sometimes, even if you have planned and prepared
with a lot of care, a dish will not turn out the way you
wanted. Please don’t be discouraged—even profes-
sional chefs make mistakes, but they don’t let that stop
them from trying a recipe until they get it just right. The
whole process helps make them a better cook.
Planning Meals
When shopping for your family meals, always consider your
family’s budget. An adult at home can help you determine how
much to spend and how to stay within budget.
Plan wisely and you won’t have many leftovers—unless
you want leftovers. For example, if you make a big pot of chow-
der, you can serve it for dinner, refrigerate it, and have some
the next day. You also might freeze a portion to enjoy later on.
Always look at the number of servings indicated by the
recipe; for example, “serves four.” From there, the recipe can be
increased for a larger crowd or decreased for only a couple of
people. Just double the amount of ingredients listed to cook for
twice the number of people the recipe serves, or halve the
ingredients for just two people. Please note that doubling does
not always work well for baked goods, such as cakes, however.
Eating on a budget
can sometimes be
challenging. For
tips on how to
shop and eat
wisely, go to the
U.S. Department
of Agriculture’s
MyPlate website
at www.myplate.
gov. From the
homepage, under
"Eat Healthy," look
for “Healthy
Eating on
a Budget.”
20 COOKING
Meals at Home.


Buying in bulk and freezing portions of ingredients
(such as fresh meats and poultry) often cuts per-unit
costs, saving money in the long run. When freezing
fresh meats, remove them from their original packaging
and wrap recipe-sized portions tightly in freezer wrap or
resealable plastic freezer bags.
Understanding the Equipment
Before you cook at home, understand your cooking equipment,
including appliances, utensils, pots, and pans. Appliances
include the stove and oven, microwave, refrigerator, and
garbage disposal, plus any small appliances such as a food
processor, blender, and electric mixer. All these appliances serve
a function in the food preparation process, and care must be
taken in operating these devices correctly.
For example, food pro-
cessors and blenders have
very powerful and sharp
blades that can chop, puree,
and liquefy foods. Use them
only for foods recom-
mended by the manufac-
turer. Always make sure the
top is firmly locked in place
before operating a food pro-
cessor or blender. Most food
processors have safety fea-
tures that prevent the appli-
ance from operating unless
the top is secure.
Stoves are another
appliance with varying
requirements. Ask an adult
to show you things like which kinds of pots and pans are
appropriate for your electric stove, or how to safely light any
stovetop burner that does not have a pilot light.
See the measurements chart in the “Menus and
Recipes” chapter for help with adjusting the yield or
serving size of a recipe.
COOKING 21
.Meals at Home


Cooking With a Microwave Oven
Microwaving may be the most common indoor cooking method
used by Scouts. The microwave heats food by converting
ordinary electric power into very short radio waves. Here are
some tips for using a microwave oven.
A microwave oven is a great time-saver, especially with
simple meals. Baked potatoes take at least 45 minutes in a
conventional oven or over a campfire but cook in just a few
minutes with a microwave. Reheating tortillas takes only about
30 seconds in the microwave; in a conventional oven, it might
take five or 10 minutes. Some foods change in texture when
cooked in a microwave. For example, potatoes baked in an
oven or on the coals have crisp shells and dry, fluffy interiors
that some people prefer to the softer, steamier microwave-
cooked potato.
Be careful when eating foods straight from the micro-
wave, especially those with filling. The filling may be hot
even though the outside feels lukewarm.
Know your microwave wattage before microwaving food. Read
and follow cooking instructions on the package. To ensure a safe
internal temperature, always use a food thermometer.
22 COOKING
Meals at Home.


Microwave Guidelines
• Never use aluminum foil or
other metallic items because
they could create a fire.
• Never turn on an empty micro-
wave; doing so will damage
the appliance.
• Due to health risks, use only
containers and covers made
for use in the microwave.
Wax paper or a paper towel
works well.
• Dishes used for cooking in a
microwave get very hot, which
is why it’s important to use con-
tainers made for use in the
microwave. Always use oven
mitts to remove heated dishes.
• Stir, rotate, or turn foods upside
down (where possible) midway
through the microwaving time
to help ensure even cooking and
to eliminate cold spots where
harmful bacteria can survive.
Even if the microwave oven has
a turntable, it’s still helpful to stir
and turn food top to bottom.
• When removing food from the
microwave, lift the cover on the
far side to let any steam out.
COOKING 23
.Meals at Home


Coordinating a Timetable
Meals at camp or on the trail should be simple. One-pot meals,
foil meals, or meals that require adding only hot water often are
an easy choice. Save more complicated and time-consuming
dishes for preparing at home.
A timetable is a great aid in meal planning and preparation.
The best way to plan a meal is to follow a schedule. Create
a timetable, based on how long it takes to prepare each course
or recipe. This eliminates much of the anxiety that can come
from preparing a meal for others.
Here are some simple rules of thumb. Write down
which course, or food, takes the longest to prepare, then
the next-to-longest, and so on. From there, break it down into
smaller steps. Making a roast, for example, involves trimming
the fat, rinsing the meat, preheating the oven, seasoning the
meat, putting it on a drip rack in a pan in the oven, and then
cooking it for the remainder of the time. While the roast cooks,
you have enough time to prepare other side dishes and the
dessert. Bread, rolls, and the like are usually the last thing to
be popped in the oven before a meal is served.
Coordinating a
timetable for some
meals seems to be
easier than others.
For example, most
casserole dishes
are easy to keep
warm. But there is
no reason to be
mashing potatoes
while the grilled
chicken on
the table is
getting cold.
24 COOKING
Meals at Home.


Here is an example. For Sunday dinner, you decide to make
roast beef, mashed potatoes with gravy, green bean casserole,
cucumber soup, and crescent rolls, with rice pudding for des-
sert. You and your family are eating at 5 p.m.
You consult your recipes and discover that, including time
to make the gravy, the roast will take 3½ hours to complete.
You put the roast in first. You then see that, with all the time
allowed for various steps, the cucumber soup takes about 45
minutes to prepare, plus a few hours to chill afterward, since
the soup should be served cold.
Remember, you usually
will work on more than one
recipe at a time. Although it
may take a couple of hours for
the cucumber soup to chill,
once it is made, you can work
on something else for the meal
while the soup chills.
Notice that items on your
timetable sometimes overlap.
The items shown between 3:30
and 4:30 seem to take longer
than the hour you allowed. However,
a great deal of that time the vegeta-
bles are cooking so you have time
to prepare another dish. Also,
you do not always include mea-
surements. Perhaps it is an item
in which you use exactly what
you bought, or perhaps you
are familiar with the recipe
and know how much to
add. The main thing is
that your timetable is
simply a tool for your
use, so you can jot
down as much or
as little detail as
you want.
When you have broken down and prioritized all
the steps for each recipe, your timetable looks
something like this.
After studying your
recipes, your initial
list looks like this.
COOKING 25
.Meals at Home


Slow Cookers
Slow cookers (also referred to as Crock-Pots) are
excellent time-savers and help simplify meal planning.
These appliances primarily have an electrical heat
source. You can use them to simmer, steam, stew, broil,
roast, and boil. Slow cookers are safe to use when you
are not at home for recipes that will take a long time to
cook. When used properly, slow cookers decrease the
risk of burning you and your food. Many newer slow
cookers have safety features to shut off automatically.
You can find a number of slow cooker recipes online.
Many of those recipes can be adapted to Dutch oven
cooking at camp.
For requirements 4, 5, and 6, it’s important that those you
have served evaluate your meals on presentation and
taste. Consider their comments as you evaluate your own
meals. Then you will be prepared to discuss what you
have learned with your counselor.
Always use appliances with an adult’s supervision.
26 COOKING
Meals at Home.


Using Spices and Herbs
Experimenting with spices and herbs is another healthy way to enhance the
flavor of foods. Most comprehensive cookbooks have a chart that will show
you which herbs and spices go best with various meats and vegetables.
BasilMint
Rosemary
Oregano
Parsley
Cumin Chili Cinnamon Bay Leaves
Thyme
COOKING 27
.Meals at Home





Camp Cooking
Planning and preparation are key in camp cooking and
important in making your cookout a rewarding experience.
Choosing Cooking Equipment
There are times when campfires are still the center of Scout life
and may be appropriate. However, Scouts today are wiser about
the environment and understand that fires can leave scars upon
the land. Lighting campfires in heavily used campsites can mar
surrounding forests as people gather up every stick of dead
wood and break off tree branches for fuel. Instead, most Scout
campers now use stoves for cooking.
Camp stoves allow you to
prepare meals in nearly every
sort of weather, on almost any
terrain, and without relying on
available firewood. Best of all,
camp stoves leave no marks on
the land and do not require a
fire ring.
Always fill a camp stove with fuel outdoors. Never loosen
the cap or fill the tank near an open flame or pilot light,
or while the stove is hot.
COOKING 29
.Camp Cooking


Selecting a Stove
The stove you choose depends on the kind of cooking you will
do, type of fuel you want to use, and weight you are willing to
carry. Always read and follow the manufacturer’s instructions for
carrying, fueling, using, maintaining, and storing camp stoves.
White Gas. White gas is a highly distilled fuel. Some white
gas stoves must be preheated, often by squeezing a dab of
flammable paste into a depression at the base of the burner
stem. Preheating increases the pressure inside the fuel tank,
forcing vaporized fuel up a stem and into a burner where it
can be ignited with a match. Once the burner is roaring, it will
keep the fuel tank hot enough to maintain a steady supply of
vaporized fuel.
Cartridge Stoves. If you want simplicity,
safety, and convenience, butane and
propane cartridge stoves are your best
choice. These stoves need no pumping or
preheating; simply attach a fuel canister,
turn the control knob, and light the burner.
Cartridge stoves work well in warm
weather and at high altitudes, but they
lose efficiency as the temperature drops.
White gas stoves equipped with pumps that pressurize their fuel
tanks can be an advantage in cold weather.
Cartridge caution:
Never place a
windscreen
around a
cartridge stove—
the cartridge
might explode.
30 COOKING
Camp Cooking.


.Camp Cooking
Propane Tank Stoves. Two-burner propane stoves are too
hefty for backpacking but can be just right for larger groups
and when weight is not a big issue. Propane is highly
flammable, so take appropriate precautions
when using propane stoves.
Kerosene. This is a hot burning,
nonexplosive fuel available almost
anywhere. Kerosene camp stoves
are unusual in North America but
are frequently seen on international
expeditions. A kerosene stove must
be preheated before it can be lit.
Grills
Many campgrounds have grills already set up. A simple
portable grill with legs placed over your campfire also makes a
good cooking area. The pots or pans can be placed on the grill,
or foods can cook directly on the grill over coals.
Campfire Cooking
Before you decide to use a campfire as your source of
heat for cooking, find out in advance if the area where
you want to camp permits fires. If you build one, use an
existing fire ring and use wood no thicker than your
wrist. Dispose of ashes properly. Even where fires are
allowed, a lightweight stove can make it easier for you to
camp without leaving a trace, because
• Campfires can char the ground, blacken rocks, and
sterilize soil. Vegetation might have a hard time
growing where a fire has been, which is why you
should always try to use an established fire ring.
• Fires consume branches, bark, and other organic
material that would have provided shelter and food
for animals and plants.
• Campfires must be closely watched at all times to
prevent them from spreading into surrounding
grasses, brush, and trees.
Propane tank stoves are great for bigger
groups and when transporting is not a
big deal.
COOKING 31


Charcoal. Charcoal makes outdoor
cooking and grilling easy, as long as there
are no regulations against its use where
you camp. Dutch oven cooking, stick
cooking, and cooking with foil packs are a
snap with charcoal. Using self-lighting
charcoal vastly decreases the amount of
time it takes to get the coals perfect for
grilling (when they are covered with gray
ash throughout).
Cook Kits and Utensils
Deciding which utensils to take on a campout depends on what
you plan to cook. Plan meals based on the length of the trip,
your destination, and how you will get there.
Planning meals for a campout includes making a list of
utensils. Pay close attention to recipes to ensure your list is
complete. A standard chef’s cook kit, which offers a great
variety of tools and utensils, probably has what you need,
but make sure.
In addition to the cooking utensils and pots and pans you
will need to cook for a group, do not forget your own personal
eating utensils. Also bring resealable plastic bags with herbs,
pinches of spices, salt and pepper packets, and other seasonings
or condiments to make your dishes even more mouthwatering.
When buying new gear, get the best you can afford.
Portable
charcoal grill
32 COOKING
Camp Cooking.


Using Stoves Safely
In camp, follow all safety guidelines described in using a camp stove. Read your
stove’s instructions carefully and follow them exactly.
1. Never fuel, light, or operate a gas stove or lantern inside a tent, snow cave,
or igloo; always do this outdoors.
2. Use, refuel, and store stoves and lanterns only with the supervision of a knowl-
edgeable adult and in Scout facilities only where allowed.
3. Operate and maintain stoves and lanterns according to the manufacturer’s
instructions included with the product.
4. Store fuel in well-marked, approved containers (never in a glass container)
and in a ventilated, locked box at least 20 feet from buildings and tents,
and below 100 degrees F. Keep containers well away from campfires, burning
stoves, and all sources of heat.
5. Allow hot stoves and lanterns to cool completely before changing compressed-
gas cartridges or cylinders, or refilling from containers of liquid fuel.
6. Refill stoves and lanterns outdoors, a safe distance from flames, including
other stoves, campfires, and personal smoking substances. Use cartridges or
fuel expressly recommended for your stoves by the manufacturer. Use a funnel
to pour liquid fuel into a stove or lantern. Recap the fuel container and stove or
lantern. Before lighting the device, wait until any spilled fuel has evaporated.
7. Place the stove on a level, secure surface before operating. On snow, place the
stove on an 8-inch-square piece of plywood or other flat surface to insulate it
from the cold and make it more stable.
8. Have stoves and lanterns checked periodically by knowledgeable adults to
make sure they are in top working condition.
9. To avoid possible fires, locate gas tanks, stoves, etc., below any tents since
heavy leakage of gas will flow downhill the same as water.
10. Follow the manufacturer’s instructions for lighting a stove. Keep fuel containers
and extra canisters well away. Do not hover over the stove when lighting it.
Open the stove valve quickly for two full turns and light carefully, with head,
fingers, and hands to the side of the burner; then adjust down. Keep your head
and body to one side in case the stove flares up.
11. Never leave a lighted stove or lantern unattended.
12. Do not overload a stove with a heavy pot or large frying pan. When cooking
requires a pot capacity of more than 2 quarts, set up a separate grill with legs
to hold the pot, then place the stove under the grill.
13. Carry empty fuel containers home for proper disposal. Do not place them in or
near fires, or in trash that will be burned; empty fuel containers will explode if
heated and should never be put in fireplaces or with burnable trash.
COOKING 33
.Camp Cooking


Dutch Oven Cooking
Some of the tastiest meals you will make and eat as a
Scout will be cooked in a Dutch oven. This sturdy iron
pot with a thick, heavy lid not only can cook one-pot
meals but can also act as a small oven for making
biscuits, breakfast casseroles, and fantastic fruit cob-
blers. Its thick build produces an even heat, ideal for
slow simmering. Despite its weight, the Dutch oven’s
versatility makes it a valuable tool in any camp kitchen.
If carrying or moving heavy equipment is not a problem,
the Dutch oven is excellent for cooking many dishes.
Cooking With Foil
One of the camp cook’s best friends is double-layered, heavy-
weight aluminum foil. It is great for cooking food in coals—and
for creating simple, disposable pots and pans. Lighter-weight
foils will not provide enough protection against punctures and
extreme heat and the possibility of burnt food.
Coals can be placed on the heavy lid of a Dutch oven to increase
the temperature inside the pot.
34 COOKING
Camp Cooking.


Foil wrapped as an airtight package around food and
sealed with a drugstore or sandwich fold becomes a miniature
pressure cooker. On a bed of hot coals with some heat on top, a
foil packet of diced vegetables and meat will cook in 10 to 15
minutes and whole potatoes in 40 to 50 minutes.
Using foil, you can cook almost anything directly in the
charcoal. Dutch ovens are also useful for cooking and
baking this way. Place the Dutch oven on top of the
coals, put coals on top of the Dutch oven’s lid, then
place your foil packet over the coals. This makes for
easy removal of items such as cakes. As a bonus, your
cleanup is easy. Just remember that used foil must be
packed out of camp.
Be sure to allow some space in your packages for
expansion by not wrapping the uncooked food too tightly. If
you want to allow food to brown or broil as in a skillet, leave
the package open at the top (or fashion like a folded drinking
cup with a flat bottom). The steam can escape and you can
watch the cooking progress of your meal.
How to Fold Foil
There are three variations of folds used in foil cooking.
Handle Wrap. Double-thickness, heavy-duty aluminum
foil can substitute for simple pots at times. Just tear off a
long enough section of foil so that you can double it, and
then crimp and fold the foil into the shape you need.
Bundle Wrap. Place food in the center of the foil. Bring the
corners of the foil up into a pyramid shape, twisting the four
corners together to seal. Leave room for expansion.
Drugstore Wrap. Place foil on a flat surface and place food
in center of the foil. Fold the sides up. Tightly
crimp and fold down several
times, leaving space inside for
expansion. Bring the open ends
together, folding several times,
and crimp to seal.
Bundle wrap
Two-handled wrap
Drugstore wrap
COOKING 35
.Camp Cooking


What You Need to Know
The first step in planning for camp cooking is to find out the des-
tination, the length of the trip, and the time of departure. Find out
how many people are going and if anyone has any known aller-
gies or dietary restrictions. Also get an idea of the group’s daily
activities while camping. If plans call for fishing one afternoon,
for example, consider having the day’s catch for dinner that eve-
ning. Have a backup plan, though, in case fish are not caught.
Consider the season of the year. In summertime, people
generally prefer lighter foods. In the winter, hot and hearty
meals help keep the body warmer and replenish the storehouse
of energy it burns keeping warm.
List the meals planned for the
length of the campout. For exam-
ple, if you are going to a nearby
campsite, leaving Friday at 4 p.m.
and returning Sunday afternoon at
the same time, you will probably
be responsible for dinner Friday,
all three meals on Saturday, and
breakfast and lunch on Sunday.
Confirm this with your unit leader.
If weight or cooking time is a
concern, consider preparing some
foods at home ahead of time to eat
on the trail, such as jerky or nuts
and dried fruits.
Using this knowledge, along
with the nutrition guidelines
described in the MyPlate model
(see the chapter called “Choosing What to Eat”), will help you
create flavorful meals for your campout. Consult the recipes in this
pamphlet as you prepare your menus.
A hearty one-pot camp stew makes
a delicious winter meal.
Make your own marinades using a little vinegar or fresh
lemon juice or lime juice and some spices. In a pinch,
just about any prepared salad dressing will do.
Marinating meat in this mixture will add even more
flavor and tenderness. Always properly discard the mar-
inade juices after you remove meat from a marinade.
36 COOKING
Camp Cooking.


Timing a Meal in Camp
Here’s an example of how to prepare a well-timed camp dinner of One-Pot
Chicken and Vegetable Rice, 100 percent whole-grain rolls, yogurt, and
Campfire Apple S’mores. If all patrol members pitch in, this should take
no more than 30 minutes of hands-on time.
3:00 Set up preparation area. Be sure that surfaces are clean
and food handlers wash their hands before helping.
3:15 Begin cutting and chopping onion, peppers, zucchini, and
green beans; set aside. Chop garlic; set aside. Zest the
lemon and set aside.
3:45 Begin cooking brown rice according to directions. Set
a timer.
4:00 Set the table and put out trivets for the hot pan. Set out
rolls and condiments on the table.
4:10 Measure out oil, salt, and pepper for cooking the chicken;
set aside.
4:15 Cut chicken breasts into bite-size pieces.
4:30 In 12-inch sauté pan, sauté chicken and vegetables
according to the recipe. Then add the cooked brown
rice and lemon zest, mix well again, and sauté until
thoroughly heated.
4:55 Remove sauté pan and place on table for serving.
5:00 Eat and enjoy your meal! The yogurt can be self-served as
each member finishes dinner.
COOKING 37
.Camp Cooking


Treating Water
You will need water for drinking, cooking, and cleanup—several
gallons a day per Scout. Public supplies (drinking faucets and
fountains) are safest and often can be found in frontcountry
campsites. Camping in dry regions requires careful planning
for how you will transport water to camp.
Open Water
Water taken from streams, rivers, lakes, and
springs may contain bacteria and parasites too
small to see and must be properly treated before
use. Use one of the following methods to treat
any water that does not come from a tested
water source.
Boiling. Bringing water to a rolling boil for a full
minute or more is the most effective way to kill
any organisms that water might contain.
Treatment Tablets. Sold in small bottles, these
tablets make a lightweight option. However, they
are not always effective against all harmful
organisms. The label usually tells you to drop one
or two tablets into a quart of water and then wait
30 minutes before drinking. The treatment may
leave a chemical taste in the water. After the tablets
have had a full 30 minutes to take effect, you can improve the
flavor by adding some drink mix. If you will be using treatment
tablets, be sure to add these to your shopping list.
Filters. Water treatment filters are effective and easy to use.
Some operate by pumping water through pores small enough to
strain out bacteria. Others contain chemicals or carbon.
Iodine Caution
Anyone who is allergic to iodine or shellfish cannot
use water treated with tablets. Iodine can also be
harmful to small children, people with thyroid
problems or who take lithium, women over 50,
pregnant women, and people with liver or
kidney disease.
Follow the manufac-
turer’s instructions
for the water filter
you plan to use.
Water treatment tablets
quickly lose their potency
once the container is opened;
be sure to check the expiration
date before you go camping.
38 COOKING
Camp Cooking.


Making a Shopping List
Plan your meals and your shopping trips carefully, taking into
consideration as precisely as possible how much of each
ingredient you will need. List everything you will need to buy.
Your counselor can help you determine the quantity of each
item for the number of people you will be feeding.
Include on your shopping list resealable plastic bags, foil,
and other nonfood items that will be needed. Read each recipe
carefully and jot down how many resealable bags you will need
and the sizes required to repackage ingredients.
Take your shopping list to the store and jot down prices
for each item. Back home, total the price for the items,
adding sales tax if it applies. Divide the amount by the
number of people who will be eating. This is the
amount you should collect from each Scout for his or
her part of the food bill.
Shopping Smart
Price is important when shopping, but equally important is
value—getting the most for your money.
The “Cooking”
chapter in the
Scouts BSA
handbooks
includes a handy
chart for single-
serving sizes.
COOKING 39
.Camp Cooking


Camp Cooking.
Most stores have shelf labels that tell not
only the price of an item but also the unit price.
The store has done the math for you to show
the cost per unit of an item rather than per
package. For a jar of jam, the unit price might be
what 1 ounce of jam costs. This means the store
has divided the total price by the number of
ounces in the jar, so you can compare the price of
different sizes and brands of the jam. The jar with
the lowest unit price may be the least expensive,
but it may not always be the best value or the most
practical for camping purposes.
You will often—but not always—find that buy-
ing in larger quantities is more economical. The larger item
may cost more than a smaller size, but you get a great deal
more of the item. However, always consider how much you
plan to use. It is not wise to buy a gallon of jam for a weekend
campout. If the economy size is much more than you will
need, buy a smaller size.
Another money-saving tip is to purchase plain-label (also
known as generic) or store brands. They are often of compara-
ble quality but can cost less than name-brand goods.
Equipment, Utensils, and Other Necessities
Take your notebook and review your recipes again. This time,
make a list of the equipment and utensils necessary to prepare
each recipe. This will make packing easier and less stressful.
Do not forget herbs, spices, cooking oils, and nonfood
items. Here are some other “unforgettables.”
Water Containers. It may be convenient to have a few
collapsible plastic water containers for use in camp cooking.
Common container sizes are 1 gallon and 21
⁄2 gallons.
Cleanup Materials. Soapless scouring pads, a rinse agent, and
a little biodegradable soap will take care of most of your dish-
washing needs in camp. As soon as they are washed, stow
cooking and personal eating gear in a small fishnet hammock
strung between two trees, or in a mesh bag tied to a branch.
Trash Bags. Large plastic trash bags work well as storage
sacks, emergency ponchos, and pack covers; for suspending
food on bear lines; and to pack out trash at the end of a trip.
Shelf labels allow
you to compare the
unit prices of items to
find the best value.
40 COOKING


Preparing for Camp Cooking
You know how long you will be gone, how many people you
will be serving, and what and how you will be cooking. You
have shopped for the food and even figured out each Scout’s
share. The only thing left is to cook, right? Well, almost.
Before Leaving Home
Getting food to the campsite takes a little planning.
Measuring Food. Measuring is important in cooking. Take only
what you need for the trip. Gather the recipes, resealable plastic
bags in different sizes, and the food you will be taking. Pack
one recipe at a time and precisely measure each ingredient. Be
organized so that in camp, you need only minimal preparation.
Some food preparation, such as slicing and chopping, can be
done in advance, saving time in camp. You can tape instructions
for food preparation to the outside of the plastic bags.
Packing Food. Repackage multiple-packaged foods into
sealable plastic bags to reduce the amount of trash you will
generate. Where necessary, put ingredients in separate bags. If
a recipe calls for several similar ingredients to be mixed (flour,
salt, and pepper, for instance), put these all in one bag.
Keep all perishable foods refrigerated until you leave, then
store them in a cooler. Keep all refrigerated foods
for the campout in a separate section of your refrig-
erator, if possible. Putting them in a separate bag
will make it easier to gather everything when it is
time to pack.
After packing all the ingredients for a meal,
recheck each recipe to make sure everything is
there. Label the packages and put all the
ingredients in one larger bag. Separate each bag
by meal and day; when you are ready to prepare
lunch on Saturday, you only need to look for the
bundle labeled “Saturday lunch.”
Pack food so that each meal is easily accessi-
ble as it is needed. As you pack the box, consider
the order of the items, and pack in reverse. First,
put in those packages needed for the last meal,
then the next to last, and so on—so that the ones
needed first are closer to the top or the front. By
the end of the trip, everything will have been eas-
ily located and the organization will have paid off.
After repackaging, don't
forget to label each bag.
As you repackage
foods and pack
what you will
need for camp,
practice safe
food handling
methods to help
prevent cross-
contamination.
COOKING 41
.Camp Cooking


Camp Cooking.
Packing the Cooking Gear. Pack cooking equipment carefully.
Forgetting a single item could be disastrous. Pack similar items
together: Group utensils together, all pots together, and so on.
Pack knives and other sharp utensils safely. Make a simple
knife sheath using a flattened paper towel roll.
Setting Up the Camp Kitchen
With your counselor, select a safe place to cook—at least
10 feet away from anything combustible, since you will be
working with fire. Keep supplies put away until it is time to
cook. If using a stove, set it up now, following the
manufacturer’s instructions. Once the stove is set up and
working and you have a pot of water ready for washing dishes
and clean water to use for cooking, the camp kitchen is ready.
Campfire Cooking
Whether using a stove, grill, or campfire as
your source of heat for cooking, manage
fire responsibly and make safety a primary
concern. Unmanaged fires can cause seri-
ous and widespread damage to the land
and can injure humans and animals. Never
leave a stove in use unattended. Keep any-
thing flammable, from fuel to matches to
paper towels, away from the fire source.
Place pots or pans directly over the
campfire and cook using firewood as
fuel. One good way to do this is to build
the campfire within a circle of rocks,
then place a grate or grill on top of the
rocks. Upon arrival at the campsite, use
an established fire ring. Build your own
only if there is no existing fire ring.
Always select a level spot for your cook
site that is at least 10 feet away from
anything that might catch fire.
As you put an ingredient in a resealable plastic bag, carefully
remove the air from the bag as you close it. A bag with
excess air inside takes up more space and might split if
squashed. Also, perishable food such as vegetables will
stay fresher without oxygen inside.
42 COOKING


Putting Out the Fire
When the cooking is done, thoroughly and properly
extinguish your campfire. Carelessness can cause
uncontrollable fires in the wilderness. Be responsible
for putting the fire cold out—beyond a doubt.
The best way to put out a campfire is with water
(do not use dishwater, which may have small food
particles and an odor that will attract wildlife).
Sprinkle—do not pour—water directly on the fire to
prevent the water from rushing into the ground with
fire still burning where the water did not hit. Use a stick
to stir the wet embers with the water. Continue sprin-
kling and stirring until the fire is completely cold out.
Charcoal Cooking. Charcoal can be used in place of small
sticks or split wood. Build the fire within a circle of rocks to get
it going quickly. Regular coals must burn about 40 minutes,
until a coat of light gray ash appears, before the fire is ready to
use. Quick-start coals are usually ready in 10 minutes.
Cooking on a Grill. First use a wire grill brush to clean the
grill, especially if food will go directly on the grill. Starting a fire
under the grill will help burn away anything remaining on its
surface. Pots and pans can be placed directly on the grill. Food
can go either directly on the grill or in foil bags. Cooking
directly on the grill gives food a unique, delicious flavor.
Another heating
device, canned
flammable jelly, is
easy to light and
can be closed up
after cooling and
reused again later.
Perfect for
warming up single
servings, it does
not efficiently
produce enough
heat to cook a
group meal.
COOKING 43
.Camp Cooking


Getting It All Done on Time
With thoughtful menu selections and a little organization and
planning, getting dishes on the table at the same time should
be easy. If charcoal cooking, allow time to heat the coals. Then
start with the food that takes the longest to cook. For example,
baked potatoes will take at least 45 minutes to cook. If grilled
fish, a salad, and baked potato are on the menu, get the
potatoes cooking first, then prepare the rest of the meal.
Cleaning Up
Clean and put away the cooking gear as quickly as possible
after the meal, even if you are not yet leaving camp. Not only
will you be able to enjoy the next activity, but the longer pots
and pans sit, the tougher they are to clean. Put on a pot of
water before you serve a meal. That way you will have hot
dishwater by the time you finish eating.
Begin cleanup by setting out three pots.
Hot-water wash pot—hot water with a few drops of
biodegradable soap.
Hot-water rinse pot—clear, hot rinse water.
Cold-water rinse pot—cold water with a sanitizing tablet or a
few drops of bleach to kill bacteria.
Scrape excess food into a garbage bag that you will pack out.
Then, scrub dishes in the hot-water wash pot. Use hot-pot
tongs to dip items in the hot rinse water. Follow with a dip in
the cold-water rinse pot. Lay clean dishes and cookware on a
plastic ground sheet and let them air dry.
Hot Hot Cold
Find a source of
treated water, or
begin the water
treatment process
now. Set aside a
bucket or large
pot of water for
washing dishes.
44 COOKING
Camp Cooking.


Dishwater Disposal. For campouts lasting no more than a
couple days, use a small kitchen strainer to remove food bits
from your wash water and put them in your trash. Carry the
wash and rinse water away from camp and at least 200 feet
(about 80 adult steps) from any water source. Give it a good
fling, spreading it over a wide area.
For longer stays at one site, dig a sump hole away from
camp and at least 200 feet from water sources. Make a hole
about 1 foot across and 2 feet deep. Pour dishwater into the
hole over a piece of screen to catch the food particles. Shake
the food particles into a trash bag. Fill the sump hole when
you break camp, and replace any ground cover.
Pack out all food scraps. Do not bury or scatter leftovers
in the woods; animals will almost always find them.
Food scraps are unhealthy for animals and can attract
them to campsites where they may lose their fear of
humans. This can be dangerous for them and for you.
Disposing of Garbage. When
camping, set a goal to leave no
trace that humans were ever
there. Always pack out everything
that was packed in, including all
food packaging, foil, food scraps,
and recyclables. Leave the camp-
site exactly as it looked when you
arrived, if not in better shape.
Storing Food. At camp, store
food where it will be safe from
animals, insects, dust, debris, and
bad weather. Frontcountry
campers can use vehicles, coolers,
or plastic buckets with tightly
fitted lids as storage units. In the
backcountry and wherever bears may be present, a bear bag is
the best answer. Not only will your food be secured but
hanging anything with an aroma will give bears no reason to
linger in your camp.
Land managers of camping areas frequented by bears can
give you further information about the best ways to store
your food.
All Scouts are
responsible for
cleanup and
washing their
own eating gear.
If everyone cleans
one pot, pan, or
utensil, the work
will be done in
no time.
COOKING 45
.Camp Cooking


Protect Your Smellables
Here are three ways to suspend food and
other “smellables” to keep them safe
from wildlife.
1. Find a tree with a sturdy branch about
20 feet above the ground. Tie one end
of a strong cord around a rock and toss
it over the branch. Then untie the cord
around the rock. Stash your provisions
in a plastic trash bag or a burlap bear
bag lined with a trash bag, and tie it to
one end of the cord. Raise the bag until
it is well out of reach of standing bears,
and tie the free end to a tree trunk.
2. If there is not a good branch nearby, find two trees about 20 to 30 feet
apart. Toss a line over a branch close to the trunk of one tree, then toss
the other end of the line over a branch of the second tree. Tie your bear
bag to the center of this line, and hoist it high between the two trees.
3. Outsmart those bears that are clever enough to claw loose the tied
end of a cord. Divide your provisions equally between two bear bags.
Raise one up to a high branch, as you would in the first method. Tie the
free end of the cord to the second bag, lift it overhead, and use a stick
or hiking staff to shove it out of reach of animals. The bags will counter-
balance one another, keeping them safe. To retrieve the bags, use a
stick to push one bag even higher, causing the other to come down
within your grasp.
46 COOKING
Camp Cooking.


Trail Cooking
Trail cooking can be the most creative and fun cooking
opportunity. Trail cooking refers to any form of overnight or day
activity that would require a meal on the go—something quick,
light, and easily stored. Things to consider when planning trail
meals are nutritional value, environment, weather, weight, and
mode of transportation.
As you plan your meals for camp and trail cooking, keep the Outdoor Code
in mind.
As an American, I will do my best to
Be clean in my outdoor manners. I will treat the outdoors as a heritage. I
will take care of it for myself and others. I will keep my trash out of lakes,
streams, fields, woods, and roadways.
Be careful with fire. I will prevent wildfire. I will build my fires only when
and where they are permitted and appropriate. When I have finished using
a fire, I will make sure it is cold out. I will leave a clean fire ring or remove
all evidence of my fire.
Be considerate in the outdoors. I will treat the land and other land
users with respect. I will follow the principles of outdoor ethics for all
outdoor activities.
Be conservation-minded. I will learn about and practice good conservation
of soil, waters, forests, minerals, grasslands, wildlife, and energy. I will
urge others to do the same.
COOKING 47
.Camp Cooking


To plan the menus for trail cooking, use the
same principles described in the sections about
menu planning and shopping for camp cooking.
See the recipes section of this pamphlet,
cookbooks, and especially vegetarian magazines
for nutritious meals to prepare along the trail.
Utilize the MyPlate nutrition guidelines (see the
chapter called “Choosing What to Eat”), and
keep in mind the need to choose nutritious foods
that will last as long as you need for your outing.
Portability is important to trail cooking, espe-
cially as you consider the combined weight of your
food and equipment while planning your trip.
Some destinations may require that meals be lim-
ited to a maximum weight per person or group.
Everything needed for meals must be carried, so
all excess weight must be eliminated. This calls for
planning simpler, lighter meals that require no
refrigeration, heavy equipment, or utensils.
One option for any outdoor adventure is a prepack-
aged meal called MRE (Meal Ready to Eat), designed to
be high in nutritional value, lightweight, and eas-
ily transportable. Other options to consider are
prepackaged dehydrated or dried foods (either
homemade or purchased). Items that fall into
this category would be jerky (beef, venison, or
other dried meats), dried fruits (raisins, cranberries,
bananas), nuts, granola, quinoa, and cereal. Mix your
favorites to make a trail snack of your liking. For even
greater ease, consider energy bars, which are easy to
pack and eat while walking. For the most part, these are
considered to be nonrefrigerated items.
Even though you are out on the trail, you can still
enjoy some simple, hot options (requiring a heat source
and preparation to become ready to eat) such as dried
soup, oatmeal, rice, and pasta.
Save space when pack-
ing out cans by rinsing
them out, carefully cut-
ting out the ends, and
flattening them.
No-trace camp cooking means whatever you take to camp must be
brought home, including litter, cans, and leftover food. Do not throw trash
into water sources or bury it in the woods, and make sure the campsite is
in better shape than you found it.
48 COOKING
Camp Cooking.


Because being in the outdoors usually requires greater
physical activity, you may want to enhance your nutritional
intake by adding powder mixes or supplements to your water.
For example, powdered protein mixes and sports drinks
enriched with vitamins can easily be added to hot or cold
water, and mixes weigh less than the ready-to-drink versions.
It is very important to consider how your food will be
kept safe (refer to the “Food Health and Safety” chapter) when
planning for your outing. Refrigeration is at a minimum or
nonexistent because coolers and ice packs may be too heavy.
Storing your food in resealable freezer bags will help protect
your food from cross-contamination and the elements as well
as provide you with a sealable trash bag at cleanup time.
Dry, prepackaged foods are convenient, tasty, light-
weight, and require no refrigeration.
Remember to
follow the USDA’s
MyPlate nutrition
model as a guide,
and learn how to
pack lightly for
trail meals.
COOKING 49
.Camp Cooking.Camp Cooking





Choosing What to Eat
Choosing what to eat brings awareness to what your body
needs to stay fit for life. Knowing what to eat is important, but
eating healthy and being physically active are equally
important. Remember, the adage rings true: You are what you
eat. When you learn about the nutritional benefits of the
different food groups, you can begin to prepare healthy and
well-balanced meals.
MyPlate: A Blueprint for Healthy Eating
To help people make better dietary choices, the U.S. Department
of Agriculture has created nutrition guidelines called MyPlate.
This plan focuses on the types of foods people should eat as
well as the quantity, which vary with a person’s age, sex, and
physical activity level. The plans emphasize fruits, vegetables,
whole grains, and fat-free or low-fat milk and dairy products.
Also included are lean meats, poultry, fish, beans, eggs, nuts,
and a very low intake of oils. Solid fats and added sugars
(empty calories) are limited to small amounts.
Whole grains are complex carbohydrates. They provide
the body with energy and stamina. While it takes
longer to burn complex carbohydrates, you should try
to make sure at least half (or 3.5 ounces) of your daily
grain intake comes from whole grains. This food group
includes whole-wheat bread, oatmeal, and
brown rice.
COOKING 51
.Choosing What to Eat


According to the USDA’s daily food plans, the average
12-year-old male who exercises 30 to 60 minutes per day should
consume about 2,200 calories a day. He should include, on
average, 7 ounces of grains, 3 cups of vegetables, 2 cups of
fruit, 3 cups from the dairy group, and 6 ounces from the pro-
tein foods group. A 15-year-old male who is physically active
less than 30 minutes a day should follow the same daily food
plan as the 12-year-old male who is more active.
The average 12-year-old female who exercises 30 to 60
minutes per day should consume about 2,000 calories a day.
She should include, on average, 6 ounces of grains, 2½ cups of
vegetables, 2 cups of fruit, 3 cups from the dairy group, and 5½
ounces from the protein foods group. A 15-year-old female who
is physically active less than 30 minutes a day should consume
about 1,800 calories a day.
If you have any medical conditions or food allergies,
consult a nutritionist or your primary care physician regarding
what your calorie intake should be and what you should eat.
You can learn more about the USDA’s daily food
plans by visiting (with your parent’s permission)
www.myplate.gov/myplate-plan. Plug in your
age, sex, height, weight, and physical activity, and
get a custom blueprint for healthy living.
Protein Group
Meat, poultry, seafood, beans, peas, eggs, nuts and seeds
(peanuts, peanut butter, pecans, hazelnuts, almonds, walnuts,
sunflower seeds), and processed soy products (tofu, tempeh,
soy burgers) all are part of this food group. Beans and peas
(pinto, black, kidney, and navy beans, black-eyed peas,
chickpeas, falafel, lentils, split peas) are included in this group
as well as the vegetable group because they provide nutrients
similar to other protein foods and to other vegetables.
Limit your intake of empty calories (calories from solid
fats and added sugars) to less than 290 calories a day.
Solid fats include butter, cream, beef and pork fats,
shortening, and the “hidden” fats found in processed
meats, cheeses, and whole milk.
52 COOKING
Choosing What to Eat.


Proteins are the building blocks for bones, muscles, and other
body parts. Proteins also provide energy.
Most meat choices should be lean, such as skinless poultry.
Seafood contains healthy oils, so choose it twice a week in
place of meat or poultry. If you are not allergic to nuts, they are
another protein food option that contains healthy oils.
Grains Group
Foods made from wheat, rice, oats, cornmeal, barley, or other
cereal grains are all grain products. These include bread, pasta,
oatmeal, breakfast cereals, tortillas, and grits. Grains are divided
into two subgroups: whole grains and refined grains. Whole
grains contain the entire grain kernel, including the bran, germ,
and endosperm. Whole-wheat flour, bulgur (cracked wheat),
oatmeal, whole cornmeal, and brown rice are examples of whole
grains. They provide dietary fiber, iron, and many B vitamins.
If you have ever eaten a hearty bowl of oatmeal and then
hiked several miles, you might have noticed that you did not
feel hungry again until your patrol broke for lunch. This is
because complex carbohydrates from whole-grain foods take
longer for your body to process and so provide energy over a
longer time period.
Refined grains have been milled, which means much of the
nutrients and vitamins have been removed, such as the bran
and germ. Refined grain products include white flour, degermed
cornmeal, and white rice. Most refined grains are enriched,
which means that iron and certain B vitamins are added back
after processing, but fiber is not. Foods produced from refined
grains include white bread, grits, noodles and pasta (other than
whole-grain varieties), and pita bread.
Many Americans eat too many
high-fat proteins like hot dogs,
sausage, or bacon. Choose
leaner proteins instead such as
chicken, turkey, and fish. You
could also challenge yourself
to have at least one meatless
dinner each week, such as
meatless chili with beans.
COOKING 53
.Choosing What to Eat


Vegetable Group
Any vegetable or 100 percent vegetable juice counts in the
vegetable group. Vegetables can be raw or cooked, frozen,
canned, dried, or dehydrated. They can be eaten whole, cut up,
or mashed. Vegetables are organized into five subgroups, based
on their nutrient content.
Dark green vegetables: bok choy, broccoli, dark green
leafy lettuce, greens (collard, turnip, mustard, kale),
spinach, watercress
Red, orange, and yellow vegetables: acorn squash, beets,
butternut squash, carrots, pumpkin, summer squash, sweet
peppers (red and orange)
Beans and peas: black beans, garbanzo beans (chickpeas),
kidney beans, lentils, navy beans, pinto beans, soybeans, split
peas, white beans
Starchy vegetables: fresh black-eyed peas, green peas, lima
beans, plantains, potatoes, sweet corn, sweet potatoes, yams
Other vegetables: artichokes, asparagus, avocados, beets,
brussels sprouts, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, cucumbers,
eggplant, green beans, green peppers, okra, onions, radishes,
turnips, zucchini
Some vegetables
fall under more
than one category.
For example,
lentils, butternut
squash, and
chickpeas are
also considered
starchy
vegetables.
Eat your veggies! Choose fresh, frozen, canned, or dried.
Fresh is best, then frozen, then canned.
54 COOKING
Choosing What to Eat.


You should consume more fruits and vegetables than
any other categories. These foods provide important
vitamins and minerals that your body needs to function
properly. They also provide roughage, or fiber, which
helps keep your digestive system healthy.
Fruit Group
All whole, cut up, or pureed fruit and 100 percent fruit juice
count as part of the fruit group. Fruits can be fresh, canned,
frozen, or dried. Fruits can be a tasty sweet treat in place of
foods loaded with added sugars.
Berries: blackberries, blueberries, kiwi, raspberries, strawberries
Citrus fruits: clementines, grapefruit, lemons, limes, nectarines,
oranges, tangelos, tangerines
Melons: cantaloupe, casaba, honeydew, watermelon
Pitted (stone) fruits: apricots, cherries, mangoes, nectarines,
peaches, plums
Other fruits: apples, bananas, grapes, pears, pineapples
In place of favorite standbys, try something different:
tangelos instead of oranges; mango instead of peaches
or nectarines; kiwi fruit instead of watermelon. If you are
drinking juice, make sure your juice is 100 percent fruit
juice, without added sugars like high fructose corn syrup.
Read the label.
Dairy Group
The foods and beverages in this group include those made from
milk and calcium-fortified soy milk. Examples include milk,
yogurt, cheese, puddings, and ice cream. When choosing foods
from this group, it’s usually best to select low-fat or fat-free ver-
sions. Fats in milk, yogurt, cheese, and ice cream count against
your empty-calorie limit. If you choose sweetened milk products,
the added sugars also count against your empty-calorie limit.
All dairy products provide calcium to help build strong
bones and teeth. Almost all milks and some yogurts are fortified
with vitamin D, which helps your body to absorb calcium. For
COOKING 55
.Choosing What to Eat


people who are lactose intolerant, lactose-free and lower-lactose
products are available, including lactose-free milk, hard cheeses,
and yogurt.
Milk: fat-free (skim), low-fat (1 percent fat), reduced-fat
(2 percent fat), whole milk, flavored milk, lactose-reduced,
and lactose-free milk
Other milk-based products: flavored and fruit yogurts, yogurt-
based drinks, ice milk, ice cream, frozen yogurt, chocolate milk,
sour cream, cream cheese, processed American cheese
Hard natural cheeses: cheddar, mozzarella, Parmesan, Swiss
Soft cheeses: ricotta, goat (feta), Brie
Oils and Fats
Oils are fats that are liquid at room temperature, such as the
vegetable oils used in cooking. Oils come from many different
plants and from fish. Although they provide some essential
nutrients, oils and fats are not a food group. Your body needs
oils only in very small quantities. Therefore, oils are included in
the daily food plans.
Fats such as butter, margarine, shortening, beef fat, chicken
fat, and pork fat (lard) are solid at room temperature. Solid fats
come from animals and can also be made from vegetable oils.
Foods high in solid fats include many desserts and baked
goods such as cakes, cookies, and doughnuts; cheese and
foods containing cheese like pizza and nachos; hot dogs,
sausages, bacon, and ribs; and ice cream.
Most Scouts need 5 to 6 teaspoons of oils a
day. Oils are part of many of the foods you eat, like
mayonnaise on sandwiches or in salad dressings.
If you must increase the amount of oil you consume,
choose an oil instead of a solid fat. For example, use
vegetable oil rather than butter when cooking.
Skim (fat-free)
milk contains the
same amount of
calcium and other
essential nutrients
as whole milk, but
has less fat and
fewer calories.
Oils from plant sources, such as vegetable and nut oils,
contain no cholesterol. Even so, these products are fatten-
ing and should still be consumed in very small amounts.
56 COOKING
Choosing What to Eat.


Common oils include canola, sunflower, corn, cottonseed,
olive, peanut, safflower, and soybean. Some foods (nuts, some
fish, olives, avocados) are naturally high in oils. Mayonnaise,
some salad dressings, and margarine are mostly oil. Check the
nutrition label to find margarines with zero grams of trans fat.
Most of these oils are high in monounsaturated or
polyunsaturated fats, low in saturated fats, and are considered
“good” because they help lower cholesterol levels. A few plant
oils, such as coconut oil, are high in saturated fats and for
nutritional purposes are considered solid fats.
Empty calories. Empty calories are calories from solid fats and
added sugars that provide calories but few or none of the nutri-
ents your body needs to grow and stay healthy. If you choose
foods with a lot of empty calories, it is harder to eat enough of
the foods you need for health—vegetables, fruits, whole grains,
dairy, and protein foods.
Added sugars are sugars and syrups that are added to
foods or beverages when they are processed or prepared. They
do not include the natural sugars in milk and fruits. The major
sources of added sugars for Americans are soft drinks, energy
drinks, sports drinks, and sweetened fruit drinks; candies;
desserts and baked goods such as cakes, cookies, and
doughnuts; and ice cream.
You may have noticed that some foods contain a lot of
both solid fats and added sugars. In some foods, like most
candies and sodas, all the calories are empty calories. However,
empty calories from solid fats and added sugars can also be
found in some other foods that contain important nutrients. For
example, chocolate milk has some empty calories but also has
the nutrients found in milk.
Some foods with empty calories can be found in forms
with less solid fat or added sugars. Low-fat cheeses and low-fat
hot dogs can be purchased. You can choose water, low-fat milk,
or sugar-free soda instead of drinks with sugar.
A small amount of empty calories is OK, but most people
eat far more than is healthy. It is important to limit empty
calories to the amount that fits your calorie and nutrient needs.
You can lower your intake by eating and drinking foods and
beverages containing empty calories less often or by decreasing
the amount you eat or drink.
It can be hard to
think ahead when
you are young.
However, if you
develop good
eating habits now,
it will be easier
for you to lead a
healthier life and
may help prevent
many of the
health problems
that are linked to
poor eating
habits.
COOKING 57
.Choosing What to Eat


Preparing Foods Healthfully
The way a food is prepared can affect its nutritional value, so be
aware of how food is prepared in order to make nutritious meals
and eat for health. For example, a baked potato stuffed with
fresh, steamed vegetables has little sodium and fat and lots of
vitamins and minerals. The same baked potato with butter, sour
cream, cheese, and crumbled bacon is high in sodium (salt) and
empty calories from solid fat.
Fried potatoes, like french fries and hash browns, are often
high in sodium as well as fat. Try making oven-baked fries sea-
soned with spices instead of salt. To minimize adding sugar to a
recipe, consider caramelizing the natural sugars in onions and
root vegetables to sweeten a sauce, or adding ripe fruits or
dried cranberries to cookies.
Consuming too many sweets and fried foods can cause
your weight to skyrocket while your energy and overall
health may decline. Eating poorly can cause serious
health problems, too. We can choose healthy foods
that may help to manage, reverse, and prevent chronic
diseases such as obesity, Type 2 diabetes, heart
disease, and some cancers. Think of food as medicine
for a healthy body, soul, and mind.
General Food Preparation
Knowing about cooking methods and about the different food
groups will provide you with the knowledge you need to
prepare excellent meals.
Eating a wide
variety of healthy
foods will help
ensure that you
are maintaining a
well-balanced diet
and developing
good eating
habits.
A good substitute for sweets is
fruit. An apple or orange can
satisfy your sweet tooth and
provide essential nutrients.
58 COOKING
Choosing What to Eat.


Learn How to Read the Label
The food label is regulated by the Food and Drug Administration
and based on a 2,000 calorie diet, but your calorie needs might
be different. Check out the serving size. Remember that one
package may contain more than one serving. Use the serving size
to determine the total number of calories and nutrients per
package. Consider the calories. When comparing foods,
remember that 400 or more calories per serving for a single food
is high. Keep track of the calories you eat throughout the day.
Determine your “target” calories per day and get your own
daily food plan by visiting www.myplate.gov. Choose nutrients
wisely. When making daily food choices, pick foods that are
lower in certain fats, cholesterol, and sodium. When comparing
“%DV” (“percent daily value”), remember—5%DV is low;
20%DV is high.
Get more of these nutrients: Potassium, fiber, vitamins A and
C, iron, and calcium. Choose foods with a higher %DV of these
important nutrients.
Limit these nutrients: Trans fat, saturated fat, cholesterol,
sodium, and sugars. Choose foods lower in these nutrients, and
limit your consumption of trans fat as much as possible.
1 Serving size and servings
per container
2 Number of calories
3 Limit these nutrients
5 Percent of daily values,
or %DV
6 Footnote with
daily values
4 Get enough of
these nutrients
The “% Daily
Values” (or
“%DV”) are
the amounts
of nutrients
recommended for
Americans ages 4
and older to eat
each day, based
on a 2,000 calorie
diet. Your own
daily values may
be higher or
lower, depending
on your caloric
needs, which vary
according to age,
sex, and physical
activity level.
When comparing
nutrients in foods,
look for the “%DV”
on the label. For
example, “5%DV”
or less per serving
means the amount
or percentage is
low. (Source: U.S.
Food and Drug
Administration)
COOKING 59
.Choosing What to Eat


The label doesn’t show a %DV for trans fat or sugars.
However, you can still look at the nutrition facts label and
choose the foods with lower or zero grams of trans fat and
sugar when comparing two foods. Go online (with your
parent’s permission) for fun ideas and activities on how to
read food labels; visit www.fda.gov/food/nutrition-education-
resources-materials/nutrition-facts-label-read-label-youth-outreach-
materials#kids.
The nutrition facts label can be extremely helpful if you are
shopping with food allergies, intolerances, and diseases in mind.
All FDA-regulated manufactured food products that contain
• Food allergens (milk, soy, peanut, wheat, egg) as an
ingredient are required by U.S. law to list specific words
on the product label.
• A crustacean shellfish as an ingredient are required by U.S.
law to list the specific crustacean shellfish on the product
label. For example, a food containing crab must list “crab”
on the product label.
• Tree nuts as an ingredient are required by U.S. law to list the
specific tree nut on the product label. For example, a food
containing almonds must list “almonds” on the product label.
Choose your
favorite snacks
and measure out
single servings.
Keep them in
resealable plastic
bags or containers
so you can grab
and go.
Fruit cups and
canned or frozen
fruit can make
great sweet snacks,
as long as you
choose those that
are low in sugar.
Chill out in the freezer section and look for nutrition
labels. Compare frozen vegetables, including ones with
and without sauce, and go for the one with the lowest
fat content and the highest amount of vitamin A. On
frozen pizzas, try to find the one lowest in fat and
sodium and highest in calcium and iron.
60 COOKING
Choosing What to Eat.


Special Dietary Restrictions
If you have dietary restrictions or are preparing meals for those
who do, it’s good to have an awareness about those matters.
Be aware of any food allergies of those for whom you are cooking. If
necessary, provide alternative food choices from the same food group.
For example, offer calcium-fortified soy milk to someone allergic to milk.
Vegetarianism
People who do not eat meat, seafood, or poultry but do eat
eggs, cheese, and other dairy products are considered lacto-ovo
vegetarians. Vegans (“vee-guns”) do not eat any dairy or animal
products, including eggs, meat-based broths, or gelatin. For
calcium, they rely on calcium-fortified soy milk, other calcium-
fortified beverages, and some leafy greens. Vegetarians rely on
plant-based protein foods (beans, peas, nuts, seeds, soy prod-
ucts) for protein and iron, and dairy alternatives for calcium.
Consider the needs of those who are vegetarian when creat-
ing menus. For example, a bean burrito makes a good substitute
for a chicken burrito. Meatless, soy-based versions of burgers, hot
dogs, chicken nuggets, bacon, and sausage also are available.
Religion
People of different faiths may not eat certain foods at any time,
or on a particular day, or during a certain time of the year. It
is helpful to know about these restrictions if you need to plan
ahead to accommodate anyone’s diet.
Meatless
spaghetti sauce
served with
whole-wheat
pasta could be
offered as an
alternative for
someone who is
a vegetarian.
Take the time to find out the individual dietary requirements of those you
are serving so that you can accommodate their needs.
COOKING 61
.Choosing What to Eat


Food Health and Safety .
Food Health and Safety
Safety is always a Scout’s primary consideration. Along with
considering the gear needed, the environment, and any
necessary protection from the elements, the first consideration
in preparing for any meal would be the safety of the people you
are serving.
Cooking and First Aid
All good cooks should be prepared to take action should
an injury occur. They must know how to properly prepare
and store foods to help prevent cross-contamination and
avoid the spread of food-related illnesses. They should also
be able to identify when individuals become sick because
of an illness or allergic reaction. Following the safety
guidelines presented here will not eliminate your risk of a
cooking injury but will help prepare you in case of an
accident. Basic first-aid techniques should be used
when someone is injured while cooking.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk and
the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to antici-
pate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about
any incident that might happen while you are cooking.


COOKING 63
A first-aid kit is useful for treating injuries, but you should
manage risk by relying first on safety and prevention.
Burns and Scalds
Burns occur by contact with flame, hot objects, chemicals,
electrical sources, radiated heat, frozen surfaces, friction, or
radiation. Scalds are burns caused by contact with boiling fluids
or steam. Treatment for minor burns and scalds is the same.
Burns generally are characterized by degree, or the severity of
the skin and tissue damage.
Superficial (first-degree) burns. Mild burns, such as you
might get from touching a baking dish that has just come out of
an oven, will cause a painful reddening of the skin. These are
called superficial burns, which affect only the outer layer of
skin. Here is how to treat a superficial burn.
Step 1—Move the victim to safety, away from the source of
the burn.
Step 2—Cool the burn. Hold the burn under cold water or
apply cool, wet compresses until the pain eases.
Step 3—Cover the burn. Allow the burn area to dry, then
cover loosely with a sterile gauze pad and bandage. Superficial
burns do not usually require further medical treatment unless
they affect more than 20 to 25 percent of the body.
Remember to
check the scene
before you
proceed. Always
get a victim to a
safe place before
proceeding with
treatment.
.Food Health and Safety


Partial-thickness (second-degree) burns. A partial-thickness
burn affects the outer layer of skin and part of the layer below
it. Such burns are more serious than superficial burns and
typically include a reddening and blistering of the skin. A scald
from exposure to boiling water is an example of a partial-
thickness burn. The treatment for partial-thickness burns is the
same as for superficial burns.
Full-thickness (third-degree) burns. Full-thickness
burns are very serious and can be life threatening.
They destroy the outer layer of skin and the layer
below that. A victim who has been exposed to
open flames, electricity, or chemicals may sustain
such a burn. The skin may be burned away and the
flesh charred. If nerves are damaged, the victim
may feel no pain. Such burns require immediate
medical attention. Unless the victim is having trou-
ble breathing, have the victim lie down. Try to raise
the burned areas above the level of the victim’s
heart if possible, and protect the victim from drafts.
Do not try to remove any clothing, as it may be
sticking to the victim’s flesh. After cooling the
burn, cover the area with sterile dressings, treat for
shock, and seek immediate medical attention.
The terrible thing about burns
is that the skin continues to
burn and more damage is
created until you can cool
down the affected area of the
person’s body.
Get immediate treatment for severe
(third-degree) burns or if the burn affects
breathing, the head, neck, hands, feet,
or torso.
Superficial burn Partial thickness Full thickness
64 COOKING
Food Health and Safety .


Cuts
Knives, broken glass, and more may cause injury to
people who are cooking. Follow these steps to treat
minor cuts.
Step 1—Stop the bleeding. Apply pressure with a
clean, absorbent cloth or your fingers. (Wear nonlatex
disposable gloves.)
Step 2—If the bleeding soaks through, apply a
second bandage on top. Leave the first bandage on
to preserve the clotting that has already taken place.
Step 3—If the bleeding continues, raise the wound
above the patient’s heart level.
Step 4—Once bleeding stops, clean the wound
gently with soap and water, or flush the wound with
water to remove all debris and dirt.
Step 5—Apply triple antibiotic ointment if the
person has no known allergies or sensitivities to the
medication. Cover with a clean bandage.
Get immediate medical treatment if the victim has
• Trouble breathing
• Burns that cover more than one body part or a
large surface
• Burns that may have affected the airway (such as
burns to the mouth and nose)
• Any partial-thickness or full-thickness burns that
affect the head, neck, hands, feet, or torso
• Full-thickness burns and is younger than age 5 or
older than age 60
• Burns from chemicals, explosions, or electricity
For more detailed
information about
how to treat
burns, see the
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet.
Applying direct pressure on a
wound will stop most bleeding.
COOKING 65
.Food Health and Safety


To help reduce your risk of injury, curl your fingertips as you hold
the piece of food you are cutting.
Preventing Cuts
Following a few precautions can help you stay safe.
• Keep knives and scissors sharp.
• When not in use, safely store sharp items separate
from other utensils, such as in a knife block.
• Never catch a falling knife. Let it fall, pick it up, and
wash it.
• Use proper utensils for specific tasks. It is never a
good idea to open a can with a knife.
• When using a knife, always place the item you are
cutting on a flat surface such as a wooden cutting
board. Put a damp paper towel or dish towel under
the cutting board to help keep it stable.
• Learn how to properly and safely use a knife; cut
away from yourself, making sure your fingers are not
in the knife’s path.
66 COOKING
Food Health and Safety .


Choking
Choking occurs when a foreign object such
as food becomes lodged in the throat or
windpipe, blocking the flow of air. A person
who is choking and can cough, speak, or
breathe is still getting some air to the lungs.
Encourage him or her to cough up the
object, and be ready to administer first aid
if it is needed. If the person is coughing
weakly or making high-pitched noises, or
if the person can’t cough, speak, or breathe,
you will need to take quick action.
Have someone call for help, then do
the following:
Step 1—If the person is conscious, stand
behind and place your arm across their
chest and shoulder. Lean the person for-
ward and, with the heel of your hand,
firmly strike the back between the shoulder
blades five times. If the victim still cannot
breathe, continue to steps 2 and 3.
Step 2—Stand behind the victim and
position your arms around their waist.
Make a fist with one hand and place the
thumb side against the person’s body just
above the navel but below the rib cage.
Step 3—Perform up to five abdominal
thrusts by thrusting your clasped hands
inward and upward with enough force to
pop loose the object that is blocking
the airway.
Step 4—Repeat steps 1 through 3 until the
obstruction clears or medical help arrives.
The universal sign for
choking is hands clutched
to the throat.
COOKING 67
.Food Health and Safety
2
1


General Food-Related Allergies, Illnesses,
and Conditions
Every cook should know about food allergies and foodborne
illnesses. Knowing how to avoid them and help prevent their
spreading is important.
Allergic Reaction
A food allergy results when the immune system mistakenly
targets a harmless food protein—an allergen—as a threat and
attacks it. An allergic reaction may include a range of symptoms
from mild (rashes, hives, itching, swelling, etc.) to severe
(trouble breathing, wheezing, loss of consciousness, etc.) and
even life threatening.
It’s important to be aware of any allergies of those for
whom you are cooking. For instance, people who are allergic to
peanuts cannot consume foods cooked in peanut oil. Keep in
mind that some individuals who are highly sensitive could
have an allergic reaction just by being present where peanut
oil is used for cooking.
Whenever possible, if you need to make substitutions in
cooking, provide alternatives from the same food group.
For example, for someone who is allergic to shellfish, you
could serve a different type of protein such as chicken or
turkey. Instead of pineapple, serve apples. You can still
manage to serve a well-rounded, healthy, and tasty
meal to anyone who has a food allergy.
Although nearly
any food is
capable of
causing an
allergic reaction,
only eight foods
account for 90
percent of all food
allergies in the
United States:
peanuts, tree nuts,
milk, eggs, wheat,
soy, fish, and
shellfish.
For some people with food allergies, a life-threatening
reaction called anaphylactic shock (anaphylaxis) can
occur. Symptoms can include a swelling of throat tis-
sues or tongue that makes breathing difficult or even
impossible. Scouts who have a food allergy that could
cause anaphylactic shock should share that information
with their fellow Scouts and let the unit leaders know
where anaphylaxis medications can be accessed at a
moment’s notice.
People who know they are susceptible to anaphylaxis
should carry emergency kits that contain an injection of
epinephrine, a rapidly acting hormone that reverses the
effects of anaphylactic shock.
68 COOKING
Food Health and Safety .


Illnesses and Prevention
Staying safe while handling food and equipment should be a
Scout’s top priority. Failure to follow safe-food handling
procedures could result in foodborne illness, which is
preventable and happens when a person eats contaminated
food. The symptoms are often flu-like, and many people may
not recognize that the illness is caused by harmful bacteria or
other adverse elements in food. Much of the information
presented here can be found on the website of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (see the resources section).
Campylobacter jejuni. Individuals can be exposed to this bac-
terium via contaminated water, raw or unpasteurized milk, and
raw or undercooked meat, poultry, or shellfish. Exposure will
cause diarrhea, abdominal pain, nausea, headache, and fever.
These symptoms may appear two to five days after eating the
contaminated food, and the illness may last five to seven days.
To help prevent the spread of C. jejuni, properly cook chicken,
meat, and seafood to a safe minimum internal temperature.
Consume only pasteurized milk and juice, and water that
comes only from trusted sources. Always wash your hands with
soap and water after using the bathroom.
Clostridium botulinum. This bacterium produces
a nerve toxin that causes foodborne botulism.
C. botulinum can be found in improperly canned
foods, garlic in oil, and vacuum-packed and
tightly wrapped foods. Symptoms usually appear
in 18 to 36 hours, but can sometimes appear in
as few as six hours or as many as 10 days after eating the
affected food. Symptoms include double vision, blurred vision,
drooping eyelids, slurred speech, difficulty swallowing, dry
mouth, and muscle weakness. Left untreated, some symptoms
may progress and can be deadly. Do not use damaged (crushed,
dented) canned foods or those showing signs of swelling,
leakage, punctures, holes, or rusting.
Cryptosporidium. This microscopic parasite spreads disease
most frequently via drinking water, recreational water (public
pools, lakes, hot tubs), and contaminated food. Symptoms
begin two to 10 days after infection, may last one to two weeks,
and can include dehydration, stomach cramps or pain, fever,
nausea, vomiting, and weight loss. Prevent the spread of
Cryptosporidium by washing your hands before and after
handling raw foods. Wash all fruits and vegetables.
For information
about the safe
internal tempera-
ture of cooked
foods, see the
U.S. Department
of Agriculture’s
website at www.
foodsafety.gov/
keep/charts/
mintemp.html
COOKING 69
.Food Health and Safety


Wash your hands after using the bathroom, handling animals or
animal waste, and after gardening. Avoid water that might be
contaminated, and do not drink water from swimming pools or
untreated water from shallow wells, lakes, rivers, etc.
Escherichia coli. The pathogenic
(harmful) varieties of E. coli spread
via human and animal waste and
contaminated foods such as
uncooked or undercooked beef
(especially ground beef) and
unpasteurized milk and juices.
Symptoms, which include severe
diarrhea (often bloody), abdominal
cramps, vomiting, and a low-grade
fever, can begin two to eight days
after consumption and may last
about five to seven days. To help
prevent the spread of E. coli, cook
ground beef to a safe minimum
internal temperature of 160 degrees F, and avoid unpasteurized
milk, juice, or cider, and soft cheeses made from raw milk.
Rinse fruits and vegetables under running tap water. Wash your
hands with warm water and soap after using the bathroom and
handling animals or animal waste.
Hepatitis A. This virus spreads primarily from the improper
handling of food or the consumption of contaminated food or
water, and human-to-human contact. Symptoms appear on
average 28 days after exposure and may include fever, nausea,
and abdominal discomfort, followed by several days of
jaundice. To avoid exposure, drink water only from approved
sources. Wash your hands before handling food and after using
the bathroom. A preventive vaccine is available.
Listeria monocytogenes. This bacterium causes the deadly
infection listeriosis, which can spread from contaminated ready-
to-eat foods such as hot dogs, deli meats, fermented or dry
sausage; soft cheeses made with unpasteurized milk; and raw
foods (meat, poultry, seafood, fresh fruits and vegetables).
Symptoms include fever, muscle aches, and sometimes nausea
or diarrhea. If infection spreads to the nervous system,
symptoms such as headache, stiff neck, confusion, loss of
balance, or convulsions can occur.
Before eating, always use a thermometer to
make sure the poultry you are cooking has
reached a safe internal temperature.
70 COOKING
Food Health and Safety .


Avoid exposure by cooking raw meat, poultry, and sea-
food to a safe minimum internal temperature, and by keeping
work surfaces and knives clean. Keep your refrigerator tidy
and at 40 degrees F or lower; quickly wipe up any spills,
especially from hot dogs and deli meat packages; raw meat,
poultry, and seafood; and raw eggs. Wash your hands before
and after handling raw foods and eggs. Rinse all fruits
and vegetables thoroughly under running water, and scrub
produce such as melons and cucumbers.
Norovirus. This highly contagious virus can be found in con-
taminated food and water, on surfaces, and in human waste
(including vomit). Symptoms include diarrhea, vomiting, and
stomach pain. This virus spreads quickly from person to person
and causes a large number of foodborne disease outbreaks in
the United States, especially among people together in one
place, like a cruise ship or a campout. To help prevent the
spread of norovirus, wash your hands often. Wash fruits and
vegetables and cook seafood thoroughly; avoid raw oysters and
shellfish. The virus can stay in the infected person’s stool for
two weeks and longer. Carefully clean and disinfect surfaces
and thoroughly wash the clothing of anyone who has been
infected. An infected person should not
prepare or serve others food and should
not care for those who are sick.
Salmonella. There are more than 2,300
varieties of Salmonella bacteria, which
can be found in raw or undercooked
eggs, poultry, and meat; unpasteurized
milk and juice; cheese and seafood; and
contaminated fresh fruits and vegetables.
Those infected with Salmonella may
develop diarrhea, fever, and abdominal
cramps. The symptoms usually appear 12
to 72 hours after eating and may last four to seven days. To
avoid becoming infected, cook raw meat, poultry, and egg
products to a safe temperature. Do not eat raw or undercooked
eggs. Avoid consuming raw or unpasteurized dairy products
and juice. Thoroughly wash all produce before consuming.
Staphylococcus aureus. This bacterium multiplies rapidly at
room temperature and causes gastrointestinal illness that can be
passed from person to person through improper food handling.
To report a case
of any suspected
foodborne illness
from a USDA-
inspected product,
call the USDA
Meat and Poultry
Hotline toll-free at
888-674-6854.
COOKING 71
.Food Health and Safety


Illness can happen quickly—in as little as 30 minutes after
exposure. Symptoms typically include nausea, vomiting,
stomach cramps, and diarrhea. The toxin produced by this
bacterium is heat resistant and cannot be destroyed by cooking.
Foods that have caused this type of food poisoning include
sliced meats, puddings, and sandwiches. To help prevent
staphylococcal food poisoning, keep hot foods hot (over 140
degrees F) and cold foods cold (40 degrees F or colder). Wash
your hands thoroughly with warm water and soap before
handling and preparing food. Avoid preparing food if you have
any wounds on your hands or wrists, or nose, skin, or eye
infections. Wash hard surfaces with hot water and soap before
and after preparing food.
Food-Related Conditions
Unlike food allergies, food intolerances do not involve the
immune system. Although these conditions may cause some of
the same symptoms as a true food allergy, they do not trigger
anaphylaxis, a potentially life-threatening reaction.
Lactose intolerance and non-celiac gluten sensitivity. Two
common intolerances are lactose intolerance and non-celiac
gluten sensitivity. People with lactose intolerance, are not able
to digest lactose, a type of sugar found in dairy products.
People who have non-celiac gluten sensitivity experience
the same digestive symptoms as those who have celiac disease
and gluten sensitivity. However, they also face
nongastrointestinal-related symptoms such as headache, joint
pain, and numbness.
Wash your hands with soap and water before handling food.
72 COOKING
Food Health and Safety .


Celiac disease and gluten sensitivity. Some people have
adverse reactions to gluten, which is found in wheat, rye,
barley, and perhaps oats.
When people with celiac disease eat gluten, their immune
reaction may damage the lining of the small intestine,
preventing proper absorption of the nutrients in food.
Over time, patients may become malnourished. Both celiac
and non-celiac gluten conditions are on the rise in America.
Diabetes. Diabetes is the name given to disorders in which
the body has trouble regulating its blood glucose, or blood
sugar, levels. There are two major types of diabetes: Type 1
(T1D) and Type 2 (T2D). Type 1 diabetes is an autoimmune
condition and is not linked to diet or obesity at all. T1D
cannot be prevented or reversed, can strike anyone at any age,
is not reversible or preventable, and lasts a lifetime. People
with T1D must take insulin daily.
T2D is a metabolic disorder in which a person’s body still
produces insulin but is unable to use it effectively. T2D is
usually diagnosed in adulthood and does not always require
insulin injections. Increased obesity has led to a recent rise in
cases of T2D in children and young adults. The strongest risk
of T2D is genetics.
With awareness of food allergies, intolerances,
and related diseases, and adequate planning and
preparation, it is possible for all Scouts to enjoy a safe
and nutritious meal at home or at camp.
Many grocery
stores offer
gluten-free items
such as gluten-
free crackers
and gluten-free
cookie mix.
COOKING 73
.Food Health and Safety





Careers in the
Food Industry
If you enjoy cooking, the food industry has a wide variety
of careers.
Look Beyond the Kitchen
If you have a passion for food, you may have thought about a
profession as a chef or working in a restaurant kitchen.
However, think about where the food you eat might have
originated. Who makes the frozen meals your family buys?
Who regulates and inspects the companies that produce those
meals? From farm to table, each step in the process requires
highly trained people who work very
hard to provide the highest quality food
to meet your nutritional needs.
Education
Some Scouts, such as those who live in
rural or agricultural areas, have the
opportunity to learn about food earlier
than other Scouts do because it is part
of their daily lives. However, Scouts in
urban areas may need to seek out
opportunities to learn about raising
animals and growing produce or how
to process food so that it is nutritious
and safe to eat. Some school districts
provide specialty classes in agriculture
or food preparation for those who
are interested.
COOKING 75
.Careers in the Food Industry


There are culinary and trade schools that specialize in
teaching specific food preparation skills and food service
management. Some colleges and universities have a variety of
agricultural, food service, and food science programs with the
opportunity to earn a bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree.
Others may have food research labs where they perform
research on allergies, intolerances, and diseases, and test new
foods and vitamins.
Your counselor
can help you find
information on
coursework and
the type of degree
needed for the
career that
interests you.
For more information about the food service industry, check out the library,
the internet (with your parent’s permission), and school counselors.
Ask your school counselor about ProStart, a program developed by the
Hospitality Business Alliance. ProStart is available in many states to high
school juniors and seniors. It combines classroom learning with hands-on
industry experience.
Our food comes from
a variety of places, and
goes through a “food
chain” that involves
many people with a
variety of expertise, all
charged with providing
safe, nutritional food to
consumers like you.
76 COOKING
Careers in the Food Industry.


With greater innovation and new emerging technologies,
more career paths within the food industry evolve every year.
Listed below are some of the most popular.
Production and Manufacturing Professionals
Production and manufacturing professionals handle the
beginning of the food process. This includes getting your food
from the farm, ranch, vineyard, or forest to the processing
facility, where food is transformed into the edible product you
consume. People are needed to plant, grow, harvest, transport,
and process the food.
The processing stage needs people to work specialty equip-
ment, pack containers, load or unload trucks, and manage a
warehouse and delivery routes. The people handling these
products have very specific training to handle your food safely.
These people would have training in the agricultural, butcher-
ing, or other related fields. A variety of merit badges currently
available can provide you additional information about some of
these specialty careers. See the resources section under
“Scouting Literature.”
Research and Development
Companies constantly need new varieties of food and bever-
ages. Some companies have their own R&D laboratories. Others
may hire test kitchens or university labs to create and test new
recipes. Chefs and other food professionals try out new flavor
combinations, food additives, and packaging processes to meet
the demands of society. Places like these brought us MREs, or
Meals Ready to Eat.
COOKING 77
.Careers in the Food Industry


Food and Beverage Service Professionals
The food and beverage service industry includes the people who
work at your favorite restaurant, at your school cafeteria, on
cruise ships, and in other places where food and beverages are
served. The people needed for this industry require training
and experience in management, sales, warehousing, and
transportation in addition to those who work in the direct food
areas (preparation, service, quality control) of the business.
There are companies that specialize in managing food
service areas such as cafeterias, Scout camps, and other organi-
zations. Industries such as tourism (cruise ships), transportation
(airlines, trains), special venues (sports complexes, theaters,
amusement parks), and travel (highway rest stops, airports) also
need food and beverage service professionals. These places need
skilled people to cook, manage, and promote their services.
Food and Medicine Professionals
Food affects us all, and some careers focus on the effects
of food on humans and animals. Universities in the field of
agriculture study the effects of what we feed our animals.
Nutritionists advise us on how to eat healthy and study which
foods are the best sources of energy and the healthiest for
you. Researchers explore the effects of food-related illness
and allergies on our bodies and develop treatments to combat
those effects.
Government, Public Health, Nonprofit Professionals
Multiple government agencies exist to address potential risks
present in many aspects of the food industry. Your state or
county board of health monitors retail establishments,
restaurants, and any food service providers. Organizations such
as the U.S. Department of Agriculture and the
FDA provide guidelines and seek regulations
for safer food production. The Center for
Food Safety and Applied Nutrition at the FDA
oversees all other food production facilities.
Both the USDA and the FDA have education
and outreach departments to help consumers
improve their diet and safely prepare foods.
The USDA Food
Safety and
Inspection Service
helps ensure that
the nation’s
commercial
supply of meat,
poultry, and egg
products is safe,
wholesome, and
correctly labeled
and packaged.
78 COOKING
Careers in the Food Industry.


Additional Opportunities
Magazines, newspapers, and blogs all have staff who write
about the food and beverage industry including reviews of local
restaurants and eateries. Advertising agencies have dedicated
staff members who specialize in promoting food on radio, TV,
and the internet. Some major companies also hire technology
specialists to design webpages, apps, videos, and commercials
to promote their products.
If you have a passion about food and cooking, the career
possibilities are nearly endless. Your position might not
involve being in a kitchen, but it’s definitely an exciting
world to explore.
Nonprofit
agencies provide
support to local
food banks,
homeless shelters,
and places that
need food
professionals to
feed their clients.
A wide range of talented professionals such as
inspectors, investigators, veterinarians, and scientists
are dedicated to protecting public health by ensuring
that food products are safe to eat. For more information
about public health and student employment
opportunities, visit (with your parent’s permission)
www.fsis.usda.gov/careers
COOKING 79
.Careers in the Food Industry





Menus and Recipes
This chapter includes some tasty and relatively easy recipes.
Any of them may be used to complete your merit badge
requirements. Feel free to choose your own recipes from other
resources. Keep in mind the needs of those you will be cooking
for, such as food allergies, when planning meals.
Sample Menus
Here are some sample menus that you could use or adapt.
Camp Breakfasts
Choice 1: oatmeal with chopped fruits, skim milk or soy milk
Choice 2: Fruit pancakes, orange juice
Trail Breakfasts
Choice 1: peanut butter and banana on whole-grain bread,
hot chocolate
Choice 2: whole-grain cereal with nuts and fruits, fruit juice
Practicing and
developing your
cooking style will
help you gain the
confidence you
need to prepare
a variety of
tasty meals.
Once you pick a recipe, always
read the recipe from beginning
to end before you get started.
Make sure you have all the
ingredients and utensils, and
that your stove, oven, or grill is
in good working order.
Branded prepackaged foods will have cooking directions
on the package, and some will offer menu suggestions.
Read these directions and follow them as best as you can.
COOKING 81
.Menus and Recipes


Camp Lunches
Choice 1: whole-wheat or whole-grain wrap with store-bought
hummus, Dijon Green Bean Potato Salad, chocolate milk
Choice 2: One-Pot Chicken and Vegetable Rice, Easy Fruit
Cobbler, fruit juice
Trail Lunches
Choice 1: Sloppy Jims on whole-wheat sandwich buns, carrot
sticks, fruit punch
Choice 2: veggie burger on whole-grain bread, oatmeal cookie, tea
Camp Dinners
Choice 1: Foil Pick-a-Meal with whole-grain pita bread, sliced
fresh fruit, chocolate milk
Choice 2: pizza, fresh fruit with yogurt, iced tea
One-Pot Meals
Choice 1: Coffee Can Dinner, whole-grain rolls, yogurt, fruit juice
Choice 2: Campfire Hobo Stew Foil Dinner, whole-grain rolls,
fresh sliced fruit, milk
Trail Dinners
Choice 1: Southwestern Beans and Rice, whole-wheat rolls,
Honey Granola Bars, fruit juice
Choice 2: Camp Kabobs, whole-grain rolls, Dive Into the Dark
Side Bars, hot chocolate
Meals Cooked in Foil
Foil dinner meals will add some spice to your campouts. Be
sure to always use heavy-duty foil. Prepare all ingredients in
uniform, bite-size pieces (cubes, strips, etc.).
Adding the meat/protein first, place the ingredients on a
large double thickness of heavy-duty aluminum foil. You can
also make four smaller, individual-sized packets. Season to taste
with salt and pepper. Fold and crimp foil in a drugstore wrap,
being sure to leave space for expansion. (See the “Camp
Cooking” chapter.) Bury each packet in the coals. Cook until
done, about 20 to 25 minutes.
At home: Follow the same instructions, but bake foil packets in
the oven 20 to 25 minutes at 350 degrees.
82 COOKING
Take a small note-
book to track the
planning done for
camp cooking.
Use your notes
and records of
supplies and
meals to plan the
next camping trip.
Menus and Recipes.


Measurements Equivalent
¼ teaspoon 15 drops
1 teaspoon ¹/³ tablespoon
1 tablespoon 3 teaspoons
2 tablespoons 1 fluid ounce
4 tablespoons ¼ cup or 2 fluid ounces
8 tablespoons ½ cup or 4 fluid ounces
16 tablespoons 1 cup
1 cup 8 fluid ounces
2 cups 1 pint
1 pint 16 fluid ounces
4 cups 1 quart
1 quart 32 fluid ounces
4 quarts 1 gallon (in the United States)
Carefully open the packets to avoid the steam, and
check to make sure meats are thoroughly cooked
before serving.
Some recipes do
not “double” well,
in particular for
baking, but the
recipe will often
make a note
of this.
COOKING 83
.Menus and Recipes


Foil Pick-a-Meal
Here is a way to quickly multiply the variety in your meals.
Pick one item from each column to feed four, and follow the
instructions on page 82. Pick whatever sounds good to you.
Camp Breakfast Recipes
Fruit Pancakes
1¹⁄³ cups whole-wheat flour
1 tablespoon baking powder
¾ teaspoon salt
½ teaspoon cinnamon
1¹⁄³ cups water
1 tablespoon vanilla extract
½ cup toasted walnuts, chopped
1 apple (peel if desired)
1 pear (peel if desired)
1 banana, peeled, halved, and thinly sliced
In a large bowl, combine flour, baking powder, salt, and cinna-
mon; mix well with a wire whisk. Add water and vanilla extract
to dry ingredients, and mix well with wire whisk. Add nuts,
grate apple and pear into pancake mixture, then add the
banana. Mix well. If batter is a little thick, add up to
two more tablespoons of water. Measure 1/4
cup of batter for each pancake; use a pre-
heated, nonstick pan wiped with a light
film of vegetable oil. Makes 12 pancakes.
1 pound
ground meat
4 boneless
chicken breasts
4 veggie burgers
1 pound
salmon filet
4 ham steaks
8 hot dogs
2 to 3 cups chili
1 12-ounce can
tuna mixed into
a 103
⁄4-ounce
can cream of
mushroom soup,
undiluted
4 potatoes,
chopped
3 cups cooked rice
4 sweet potatoes,
sliced
4 slices bacon, cut
in 1-inch pieces
2 cups corn chips
12 ounces pasta
(any kind),
cooked
8 whole-grain
tortillas
4 cups corn
4 carrots, sliced
in sticks
1 cup chopped
broccoli or
sweet peppers
1 cup chopped
zucchini
1 cup baked beans
1 cup shredded
cheese, any
variety
1 8-ounce can peas
1 cup sliced green
beans
1 medium onion,
diced
1 7-ounce can
mushrooms,
drained
4 pineapple rings
1 lemon, sliced
1 large apple,
chopped
1 small can
chopped green
chilies
1 cup salsa or
1 medium
tomato, chopped
1 cup diced celery
84 COOKING
Menus and Recipes.


Quick Sausage and Eggs
1 pound (16 ounces) pork or turkey sausage
12 eggs
1 cup milk
½ cup shredded cheese, any variety
Crumble and brown the sausage in a skillet over
medium-high heat, then drain grease and cool com-
pletely. Scramble the eggs with the milk and cook in a
greased pan over medium heat; allow the eggs to cool.
Store the sausage and eggs separately in resealable plastic
bags. At camp, reheat the sausage and eggs in a greased,
disposable foil pan (for easy cleanup) over the fire, grill, or
propane stove. Top with shredded cheese. Serves four to six.
Camp Lunch or Dinner Recipes
Dijon Green Bean Potato Salad
1 pound (about 4 cups) fresh green beans,
cut into ¾-inch pieces
2 pounds red-skinned new potatoes, diced
½ cup country Dijon mustard
3 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
5 tablespoons white grape juice
1 teaspoon minced garlic
2 tablespoons fresh parsley, chopped
salt and black pepper, to taste
15-ounce can cannellini beans, drained and rinsed
1 red pepper, diced
½ red onion, thinly sliced
Cook green beans in boiling water until tender.
Remove with slotted spoon and set aside to cool.
Repeat procedure with potatoes and set aside to
cool. In large mixing bowl, combine Dijon, olive
oil, grape juice, garlic, parsley, salt, and pepper,
and whisk until well blended. Add cannellini
beans, potatoes, green beans, red pepper, and
onion; gently toss until well coated. Serves 10.
COOKING 85
.Menus and Recipes
Scout Life
magazine has
hundreds of great
recipes online.
Enter “recipes” in
the search box
at scoutlife.org.


One-Pot Chicken and Vegetable Rice
2 tablespoons extra-virgin olive oil
1 pound boneless chicken breasts, cut into bite-size pieces
½ medium-size sweet onion, diced
1 tablespoon minced garlic
1 red pepper, diced
1 yellow pepper, diced
1 zucchini, diced
1 cup sliced green beans
salt and black pepper to taste
zest of 1 lemon
1 cup cooked brown rice
In a 12-inch sauté pan, heat the oil, then add chicken and
onion and sauté until onions become translucent, about five
minutes. Add garlic and sauté one minute; add peppers,
zucchini, and green beans, and sauté until just tender. Add salt,
pepper, and lemon zest; mix well. Stir in rice and cook until
thoroughly heated. Serves four.
Camp Kabobs
Cut up steak or chicken (about 4 to 6 ounces per serving)
and fresh vegetables at home. Place meat and vegetables in sep-
arate, resealable plastic bags. At camp, add 3 ounces of pre-
pared Italian salad dressing to the bag of chicken or a teaspoon
of garlic powder and 3 ounces of soy sauce to the bag of steak;
marinate for 20 to 30 minutes. When
ready to cook at camp, use metal or
wood kabob sticks and load them up
with the same item—all mushrooms
should go on their own sticks, all
meat on their own, etc. The cooking
time for the different vegetables will
vary, as will the cooking time for the
meat or chicken. This way, you can
judge when each item is properly
cooked. Position the skewers of meat
first, then hard veggies, then softer
ones like mushrooms, over the fire
for a few minutes; turn regularly. Add
foil-baked potatoes and whole-grain
bread or rolls for a complete meal.
86 COOKING
Menus and Recipes.


Coffee Can Dinner
For each serving you will need:
1 carrot
2 celery ribs
2 strips bacon
8 ounces (½ pound) lean ground beef
1 medium potato, sliced
½ cup sliced onion
1 medium tomato, sliced
salt and black pepper, to taste
coffee can with metal lid
Cut carrot in half lengthwise. Cut celery and carrot into
2-inch lengths. Cut bacon strips in half. Mold two meat
patties. Place two pieces of bacon on bottom of can. Place
half of each ingredient in layers, in order listed here. Season to
taste with salt and pepper. Repeat with second half of
ingredients, again seasoning with salt and pepper. Cover the
can with the lid of another pot (or use a double layer of foil).
Place the closed coffee can on top of glowing coals for 25
minutes. Open the lid and check after 10 minutes. If it is
browning too rapidly, pour 2 tablespoons of water into the can.
This recipe can be done only when cooking with a campfire.
Campfire Hobo Stew Foil Dinner
16 ounces (1 pound) ground beef or stew meat, cut into
small pieces
chopped vegetables of your choice (green beans, carrots,
onions, zucchini, bell peppers)
1 clove garlic, minced
salt and black pepper, to taste
4 tablespoons butter
Cut off four pieces of aluminum foil for individual
packets. Spray the foil with cooking spray. Add
meat first, then vegetables. Top with seasonings
and then butter. Close foil on all sides, leaving
some room for expansion. Be sure to mark your
packet so it does not get mixed up with some-
one else’s. Put the packets into the coals. Check
for doneness in about 10 minutes. Serves four.
Dab a small
amount of non-
hydrogenated
margarine or olive
oil on an ear of
corn before
wrapping it in foil.
Roast on the coals
for 10 minutes.
COOKING 87
.Menus and Recipes


Trail Chow
Sloppy Jims
1 tablespoon canola oil
½ medium-size sweet onion, diced
1 tablespoon minced garlic
½ red pepper, diced
½ green pepper, diced
1 pound 99 percent lean ground turkey breast
¼ teaspoon thyme
salt and black pepper, to taste
1 cup ketchup
1 tablespoon Dijon mustard
1 teaspoon white vinegar
1 teaspoon agave nectar or honey
Place canola oil in large nonstick sauté pan on medium heat
and spread to coat pan bottom. Add onion and sauté
until light golden. Add garlic, sauté one minute,
then add red and green peppers and sauté
until peppers are tender. Add turkey, breaking
into small pieces, and season with thyme,
salt, and black pepper. Stir turkey frequently with
rubber spatula or wooden spoon on medium heat and
continue to break into small pieces. When turkey becomes firm
and cooked, add ketchup, mustard, vinegar, and agave nectar.
Stir until well mixed and cook for three to five minutes, until
heated through. Serves eight.
Southwestern Beans and Rice
15-ounce can black beans
1½ cups black bean salsa
½ cup low-sodium V8 juice
1 medium-size tomato, diced
½ cup canned corn
2 cups cooked brown rice
2 tablespoons scallion, sliced
¼ of an avocado, sliced
½ piece whole-wheat pita
In a bowl, combine beans, salsa, V8 juice, tomato, and corn. To
serve, place 1/2 cup brown rice in a small bowl, top with 1/4
of the bean mixture, 1/4 of the scallions, several avocado slices,
and the pita bread. Serves four.
88 COOKING
Menus and Recipes.


Campfire Apple S’mores
2 apples
dark chocolate, broken into squares
pineapple slices
Cut apples in half crosswise, then cut into
round slices the width of your apple. Poke
out the seeded center. Place one chocolate
piece on top of one apple slice. Spear
pineapple slices on a skewer. Toast over
campfire or grill over low heat. Place
toasted pineapple slice on top of the apple
slice with chocolate and top with another
apple slice. Serves four.
Recipes to Make at Home
Vegetarian Pasta
12 ounces whole-wheat macaroni
28 ounces sweet potato, peeled and diced
3 cups unsweetened almond milk
12 ounces extra-firm tofu
1 teaspoon salt
1 teaspoon Dijon mustard
¼ teaspoon coarsely ground black pepper
¼ teaspoon nutmeg
2 pinches cayenne pepper
8 ounces shredded cheddar cheese alternative
In cook pot, cook macaroni according to instructions on the
package. Remove, strain, rinse, and set aside in a bowl covered
with plastic wrap. In a saucepan, combine sweet potato with
almond milk. Simmer uncovered over medium heat until sweet
potatoes are tender, about 20 minutes. Strain sweet potatoes
into a bowl, reserving almond milk. Measure almond milk and
add new almond milk to equal 3 cups. Place sweet potatoes in
blender with almond milk, tofu, salt, mustard, black pepper,
nutmeg, and cayenne and blend until smooth. In large bowl,
combine sweet potato sauce, macaroni, and cheddar cheese
alternative, and mix well. Place in a 9-by-13-inch baking pan,
and bake at 350 degrees for 20 minutes. Serves six.
COOKING 89
.Menus and Recipes


Chicken Divan
6 to 8 chicken breast halves, cooked and cooled
2 10-ounce boxes frozen chopped broccoli
2 cans (10¾ ounces each) condensed cream of chicken soup
4 to 5 tablespoons mayonnaise-style salad dressing
juice from half a lemon
8 ounces (about 2 cups) cheddar cheese, shredded
1 3-ounce can onion rings (or 1 cup bread crumbs)
Remove the cooked chicken meat from the bones and cut into
bite-size pieces. Cook the broccoli according to the package
instructions. In a large bowl, combine the soup, salad dressing,
and lemon juice. Layer the broccoli, chicken, and cheese
alternately in a 9-by-13-inch baking pan. Pour the soup mixture
over the top and bake, uncovered, at 350 degrees for 15 minutes.
Sprinkle the onion rings on top; continue baking 15 minutes
longer or until heated through. Serves eight to 10.
Dive Into the Dark Side Bars
1 cup toasted walnuts
1½ cups golden raisins
5 brown rice cakes
1 tablespoon agave nectar or honey
¼ teaspoon cinnamon
1 tablespoon vanilla
2 tablespoons orange juice
5 ounces 70 percent dark bittersweet chocolate
5 tablespoons skim milk or orange juice
1 tablespoon prepared coffee
Place walnuts in food processor and pulse until fine. Add rai-
sins and pulse until mixture becomes sticky. Add rice cakes and
pulse until fine and mixture is loose. Add agave nectar, cinna-
mon, vanilla, and orange juice, and process until gummy.
Spread evenly in an 8-inch square baking dish and cover
mixture with plastic wrap, pressing into the bottom of the pan
with a flat-bottomed object to evenly distribute. Remove plastic
wrap. Combine chocolate, skim milk or orange juice, and
coffee, and place over a double boiler, heating on a low flame
while stirring until chocolate is melted and smooth. Pour choc-
olate over top of pressed walnut mixture, cover, and refrigerate
at least one hour before serving. Cut into 24 portions and serve.
90 COOKING
Menus and Recipes.


Oven-Baked Sweet Potato Home Fries
1½ tablespoons canola or extra-virgin olive oil
2 teaspoons minced garlic
2 teaspoons cumin
salt and black pepper, to taste
2 pounds sweet potatoes, washed, peeled, and diced
Combine oil with garlic and seasonings and mix well. Add
potatoes, tossing until well coated. Place on nonstick baking
pan and bake at 375 degrees for about 35 minutes or until
tender. Serves eight.
Desserts and Snacks
Honey Granola Bars
1¼ cups quick-cooking oats
¼ cup whole-wheat flour
¼ cup toasted wheat germ
2 teaspoons cinnamon
¼ cup honey
¹⁄³ cup dried apricots or any dried fruit of your choice
Mix the first four ingredients. Stir in honey until mixture is
moist and crumbly. Fold in fruit. Coat an 8-inch square pan
with nonstick cooking spray. Press the mixture into the pan;
bake at 300 degrees for 18 to 20 minutes or until lightly
browned. When cool, cut into portion-size bars to pack or serve.
Easy Fruit Cobbler
2 21-ounce cans cinnamon apple pie filling
1 box white or yellow cake mix
2 cups water
1 stick butter, melted
Preheat a well-seasoned size 12 Dutch oven. Empty pie filling
into Dutch oven. Evenly sprinkle cake mix over pie filling. Add
water and melted butter. Do not mix. Secure the Dutch oven lid.
Place oven on 8 hot coals. With tongs, place 16 hot coals on lid
of Dutch oven. Cook about 40 to 50 minutes. Serves up to 10.
For variety: Try cherry filling with chocolate cake mix and
blueberry filling with lemon cake mix.
At home: Lightly grease a 9-by-13-inch pan. Preheat oven to
350 degrees. Pour pie filling into pan. Sprinkle dry cake mix
evenly over pie filling. Do not mix. Carefully pour water and
melted butter over dry cake mix. Do not stir. Bake in oven 35 to
40 minutes.
.Menus and Recipes


The Cook’s Glossary
bake. To cook by dry heat as in a
conventional oven, Dutch oven,
or in aluminum foil.
baste. To moisten food while
cooking with a liquid such as
broth, meat drippings, or
special sauces.
Baste
blanch. To plunge food into boil-
ing water briefly, then into cold
water to stop the cooking process.
boil. To cook in water or other
liquid hot enough to bubble
(212 degrees F for water at sea
level; subtract 2 degrees for each
1,000 feet of elevation; double the
given cooking time for boiling at
5,000 feet).
braise. To cook meat tender by
browning in hot oil or other liq-
uid, then cooking in a covered
pan, usually with added liquid.
broil. To cook meat directly over
or in front of an open fire.
calorie. In nonscientific terms, a
calorie is a unit of heat used to
calculate the energy your body
burns up. For instance, it takes
more energy for your body to use
up or burn off a teaspoon of olive
oil than it would a teaspoon of
yogurt. This is why a teaspoon of
olive oil has more calories than
does a teaspoon of yogurt.
ChooseMyPlate.gov. A website
that provides guidelines for healthy
eating recommended by the U.S.
Department of Agriculture.
cold out. A test to ensure that a
campfire is completely out. A fire
is cold out when there are no hot
coals and the ashes are cool to
the touch.
cut in. To blend cooking fat, usu-
ally butter or shortening, with
flour to make a dough by pressing
in with a fork or cutting into fine
chunks using a knife.
deep-fry. To cook by immersion
in very hot oil.
dredge. To coat meat with flour,
often seasoned, before browning
or frying.
Dredge
92 COOKING


Dutch oven. A thick, heavy cov-
ered pot that is ideal for cooking
foods that need to simmer slowly
for a long time or for cooking
one-pot meals.
fry. To cook in an open pan with
a small amount of oil.
generic-brand foods. Grocery
store items not considered brand-
name foods that have comparable
quality. Generic (also called
“plain label”) foods often are
more economical.
marinate. To tenderize or flavor
meat or vegetables by immersing
in spiced vinegar and oil, salad
dressing, or commercial
marinade sauce.
panfry. To cook meat in a very
hot skillet with a minimum of oil.
This method makes it possible to
cook food by broiling over a gas
or electric stove.
poach. To cook just below the
boiling point of (usually) water.
roast. To cook meat and vegeta-
bles with dry heat, as in a pan in
an oven or in aluminum foil
covered by hot coals.
Roast
sauté. To brown food quickly
using a small amount of oil in a
pan. The oil and pan must be hot
before cooking begins.
scald. To heat just below the boil-
ing point. Also, scalds are burns
caused by contact with boiling
fluids or steam.
sear. To seal surfaces of meat by
exposing to intense heat so that
juices are contained.
simmer. To cook in liquid just
barely at the boiling point.
staple. An item—usually dry—
commonly found in a cook’s pan-
try, such as salt, pepper, flour,
rice, dried pasta, and dried beans.
steam. To place food on a rack or
special device over boiling or sim-
mering water in a covered pan.
steep. Using a liquid (usually hot
water) to extract the flavor from
something dry (such as tea or
dried herbs) by soaking.
tenderize. To render meat easier
to cook or chew by softening the
tissues by pounding, with a
commercial tenderizing powder,
or by marinating.
vegan. A person who restricts his
or her diet so as not to consume
any meat or any kind of animal
products, including dairy products,
eggs, and broth.
vegetarian. A person who
restricts his or her diet so as not
to consume meat.
zest. To finely grate off the top,
colored layer of a citrus fruit such
as a lemon or lime. You can use a
knife, a “zester,” or a fine grater.
Be careful not to grate too
deeply and get the white
part, called the “pith,”
which is bitter.
Sear
.The Cook’s Glossary


Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA handbooks; Fieldbook;
Basic Illustrated Cooking Outdoors;
Cooking the Dutch Oven Way; The One
Pan Gourmet; The Outdoor Dutch Oven
Cookbook; Camp Cookery for Small
Groups, The Scouts Outdoor Cookbook,
The Scouts Dutch Oven Cookbook,
Outdoor Recipe Cards Edible Wild
Plants pocket guide; Animal Science,
Backpacking, Camping, Fire Safety, First
Aid, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Plant Science, and Public Health merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Conners, Tim, and Christine Conners.
The Scout’s Backpacking Cookbook.
Globe Pequot Press, 2012.
Eddy, Jackie, and Eleanor Clark. The
Absolute Beginner’s Cookbook: Or
How Long Do I Cook a Three-Minute
Egg?, 3rd ed. Clarkson Potter, 2002.
General Mills. Betty Crocker Kids Cook!
Wiley Publishing, 2007.
Hodgman, Ann. One Bite Won’t Kill
You. Houghton Mifflin Co., 1999.
Miller, Dorcus S. Backcountry Cooking:
From Pack to Plate in 10 Minutes.
Mountaineers Books, 1998.
New Junior Cookbook. Better Homes
and Gardens, 2012.
Siegel, Helene, and Karen Gillingham.
Totally Camping Cookbook. Ten
Speed Press, 1996.
Periodicals
Before you subscribe to a magazine,
check out a copy at your local library or
a nearby bookstore. Here are a few that
may interest you: Bon Appétit, Cook’s
Illustrated, Eating Well, Southern Living,
Taste of Home, Vegetarian Times.
Organizations and Websites
American Diabetes Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-342-2383
www.diabetes.org
American Heart Association
recipes.heart.org
Beyond Celiac
www.beyondceliac.org
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention
www.cdc.gov
Cooking Schools
www.cooking-schools.us
Resources for Cooking
94 COOKING
Resources for Cooking.


Culinary Institute of America
Toll-free telephone: 800-CULINARY
www.ciachef.edu
Exploratorium
www.exploratorium.edu/cooking
Food Allergy Research and
Education
www.foodallergy.org
Food Network
www.foodnetwork.com
JDRF
jdrf.org
MyPlate
www.myplate.gov
The Recipe Link
www.recipelink.com
U.S. Department of Agriculture
www.foodsafety.gov
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Toll-free telephone: 888-723-3366
www.fda.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Scouter and Cooking merit badge
counselor Michael Callahan,
Philadelphia, Pa., a food industry
professional, and Stephanie
Marcinkowski, Philadelphia, a Scouter
and food allergy awareness advocate.
They assisted with the content for this
edition of the Cooking merit badge
pamphlet. Thanks also to the U.S.
Department of Agriculture’s Food
Safety and Inspection Service staff:
Maribel Alonso, technical information
specialist; Mary Harris, senior project
leader; and Nadine Shaw, food safety
specialist, Scouter, and Cooking merit
badge counselor.
We appreciate the Cleveland
(Ohio) Clinic. Staff members Kristin
Kirkpatrick, Melissa Celko-Kosmon,
and James Perko were tremendously
helpful. Thanks also to FARE (Food
Allergy Research and Education) for
its assistance.
The BSA extends thanks to Scouters
who helped shape this pamphlet, led by
Ben Jelsema, Clermont, Fla., with Jim
DePaolo, Reads Landing, Minn.; Bill
Pepito, Twin Lakes, Wisconsin; Jim
Byrd, Kensington, Conn.; Donna
Cunningham, Amarillo, Texas; David
Black, Dallas, Texas; Walt Ritterbush,
Apopka, Fla.; AnnDee Sousa, Bristol,
R.I.; and Hoang Tran, Melbourne, Fla.
Some of the material provided in
this pamphlet was adapted from the
website of the USDA’s Center for
Nutrition Policy and Promotion,
www.fns.usda.gov/cnpp.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Alex Palacios, courtesy—page 7
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
courtesy—page 49 (MyPlate logo)
All photos and illustrations not mentioned
above are the property of orare pro-
tected by the Boy Scouts of America.
Tom Copeland—cover (girl)
Mark Humphries—pages 42 (resealable
bag) and 48 (can)
Bruce Levitt—page 28
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 44, 46, 64, and 65
Roger Morgan—page 83
Brian Payne—cover (boys); pages 42
(cobbler), 46 (bear bag), and 50
Randy Piland—pages 17 (Dutch oven)
and 47
Michael Roytek—page 67
COOKING 95
.Resources for Cooking


Alex: How can you tell
when a Scout has earned
the Cooking merit badge?
Andie: How?
Alex: They make good
use of their thyme.
— from a valued Scout Life reader
Make good use of your time by
reading Scout Life magazine.
It’s loaded with outdoor adventure,
games and comics, leadership
tips, life skills, stories about
other Scouts and more. It’s just
what you need to get ahead.
Use promo code SLMBP15 for
a special print + digital bundle
when you subscribe today at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe