SCOUTING
HERITAGE


SCOUTING
HERITAGE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
35970
ISBN 978-0-8395-5970-2
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Scouting-Heritage or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 3
Brooklyn Dodgers players Whit Wyatt, left, and Charles Dressen sign
autographs for Scouts at Ebbets Field, circa 1940.


4 SCOUTING HERITAGE


SCOUTING HERITAGE 5
Contents
Baden-Powell, Seton, Beard, and the Birth of Scouting . . . . . . 7
Boyce, the Birth of Scouting in America, West, and Hillcourt 13
A Century of Scouting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Scouting for Every Age . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Ultimate Scouting Adventures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Preserving Scouting Heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Reliving Scouting History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Scouting Heritage Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
These Scouts from the 1950s get a beachside whittling lesson.


Top, Scouts on Brownsea Island, circa 1907


SCOUTING HERITAGE 7
.Baden-Powell, Seton, Beard, and the Birth of Scouting
Child laborer, circa early 20th century
Baden-Powell, Seton,
Beard, and the Birth
of Scouting
During the early years of the 20th century, growing numbers of
people in England and America faced serious hardships. The
divide between rich and poor was widening, and most families
were poor or close to it. As people migrated to dirty, overcrowded
cities, they were more likely to become sick and less likely to be
able to enjoy nature or get physical exercise. In fact, when
Britain went to war in 1899, more than half the men who
volunteered for the army weren’t fit enough to fight.
Children on both sides of the
Atlantic Ocean suffered right along
with their parents. Beyond the YMCA
and some church-based programs,
few organized activities or sports
leagues were available for them to
enjoy. Even worse, at least 1.7 million
American children under the age of 16
worked full time—sometimes working
as many as 12 hours a day in factories
and on farms.
Many adults grew deeply concerned
about the problems of English and
American children. Among them were
Robert Baden-Powell, Ernest Thompson
Seton, and Daniel Carter Beard. Although these men grew up
in different countries, they had much in common. They loved
the outdoors, they were fascinated by other cultures, and they
came completely by accident to the work of creating programs
for boys and teens. First separately and then together, they laid
the foundations for the Scouting movement.


8 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Baden-Powell, Seton, Beard, and the Birth of Scouting.
Robert S. S. Baden-Powell
(1857–1941)
Known to his family as Stephe (pronounced
“Stevie”), Robert Stephenson Smyth
Baden-Powell was born in London, England,
in 1857. He and his six siblings were raised
by their mother after their father, a priest
in the Church of England, died.
Baden-Powell attended a boarding school
called Charterhouse. During his time there, he
spent more time drawing, acting, playing soccer,
and exploring the woods around the school
than he did studying. After Charterhouse, Baden-
Powell joined the British Army in 1876.
Baden-Powell loved army life and moved
quickly through the ranks. By the time Great
Britain went to war against the Boers in South
Africa in 1899, he was a colonel. That October, he was in charge
of a town called Mafeking when the Boers laid siege to it.
For the next 217 days, his force of 800 held out against several
thousand Boers. Baden-Powell tricked the Boers into thinking he
had a much larger force by making fake cannons out of wood and
moving his real guns around town to fire in different directions.
After successfully defending the city in the Siege of
Mafeking in May 1900, Baden-Powell became an instant
celebrity back home. Boys throughout England began buying
an army manual he had written, called Aids to Scouting,
and started playing soldier in their towns and neighborhoods.
This surprised Baden-Powell when he returned home in
1903, and he began thinking about ways to adapt Aids to
Scouting to a younger audience. Over the next few years, he
observed youth programs like the Boys’ Brigade (which
combined interdenominational Christianity with military
training), talked to experts from the YMCA (founded in London
in 1844), and even studied codes of conduct used by the
ancient Greeks and by the knights of the Middle Ages.
In 1906, Baden-Powell put what he’d learned into a paper
called “The Boy Scouts—A Suggestion.” The next summer, he
held an experimental camp on England’s Brownsea Island to
test his ideas. The year after that, he published Scouting for
Boys, the first Boy Scout handbook—and Scouting was born.
Scouting for Boys was Baden-Powell’s reimagining of his
earlier work Aids to Scouting (1899), incorporating youth train-
Baden-Powell
also kept up the
spirits of soldiers
and townspeople
with plays and
athletic contests.
In addition, he
turned the boys
of the town into
a cadet corps to
run errands and
serve as lookouts.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 9
.Baden-Powell, Seton, Beard, and the Birth of Scouting
ing concepts from The Birch
Bark Roll of the Woodcraft
Indians (1906) by Ernest
Thompson Seton. Aids to
Scouting focused on military
scouting and self-reliance skills
learned from Frederick Russell
Burnham, the British Army
Chief of Scouts. However, dur-
ing the Siege of Mafeking, Aids
to Scouting gained popularity
among English youth as B-P’s
exploits during the Boer War
captured the attention of peo-
ple at home in England.
Baden-Powell recruited and
trained boys as cadets during the siege, leading to Aids to
Scouting’s use in British schools for teaching observation and
deduction. After successfully testing Scouting principles at a
camp on Brownsea Island in 1907, Baden-Powell
published Scouting for Boys, presenting Scouting
from an outdoorsman’s perspective and introducing
the Scout Oath, Scout Law, recognition, and youth
games. The book’s publication sparked widespread
interest, leading to the formation of Scout patrols
worldwide. By the end of the 20th century, nearly
150 million copies of Scouting for Boys had been
published, making it one of the best-selling books of
all time.
Thanks to Scouting for Boys, Scouting quickly
spread through England, the British colonies, and
beyond. As early as 1908, people in America were
buying copies of the book and starting their own
troops. A woman in Burnside, Kentucky, started a
group she called the “Eagle Troop” that year.
In 1909, a missionary from the Church of
England founded a troop in Pawhuska, Oklahoma,
to serve American Indians. Throughout the country,
boys started their own troops and recruited their
own adult leaders—or did without.
This all happened before there was an official
American Scouting organization. There were no Boy Scouts of
America, no local councils, no camps, or other facilities. Those
things would come later.
Commemorative stone at
Brownsea Island campsite
Lieutenant-General
Baden-Powell
was made a baron
in 1929 and
became known as
Lord Baden-Powell
of Gilwell.


10 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Baden-Powell, Seton, Beard, and the Birth of Scouting.
Ernest Thompson Seton (1860–1946)
One of the experts Baden-Powell talked with in 1906 was
Ernest Thompson Seton, a British-born Canadian citizen
who’d recently founded the Society of Woodcraft Indians
in Connecticut.
Seton grew up on his family’s Ontario farm and later
worked for his older brothers on a farm they ran in
Manitoba. He didn’t care much for farming, but he loved
learning about nature down to the tiniest detail. Once, for
example, he worked by candlelight to count every feather on
a grackle’s wing.
Even though farming did
not hold Seton’s interest, art did.
A talented artist, Seton studied art
in London and New York City, and
he quickly established himself as a
wildlife artist in the 1880s. In 1885,
he produced 1,000 mammal draw-
ings for the new Century Dictionary,
and soon he began successfully writ-
ing about animals—not just drawing
them. It was the success of his 1898
book Wild Animals I Have Known,
a collection of stories he wrote
about animal heroes and villains,
that allowed him to build a small
estate in Cos Cob, Connecticut.
It was there on his Connecticut
estate in 1902 that Seton’s journey to Scouting began. It started
when he invited a group of neighborhood boys who tore down
part of his fence to camp on his property over spring break.
Seton, who was fascinated by American Indian culture, declared
the boys a tribe, had them elect their own leaders, and taught
them all sorts of Scouting skills. Soon that camp evolved into the
Woodcraft Indians, which he launched in July 1902.
Four years later, Seton published a handbook for the group
called The Birch-Bark Roll of the Woodcraft Indians. He sent a
copy to Baden-Powell, who used it as inspiration for his own
handbook and boys’ program. But that wouldn’t be Seton’s
last connection with Scouting—it would be only the start.
Seton taught
this tribe of
neighborhood
boys everything
from identifying
birds to swimming
and canoeing.
From Seton’s book Wild
Animals I Have Known


SCOUTING HERITAGE 11
.Baden-Powell, Seton, Beard, and the Birth of Scouting
Daniel Carter Beard (1850–1941)
Ten years older than Seton, Daniel Carter Beard grew up
in Covington, Kentucky, just across the Ohio River from
Cincinnati. He loved the outdoors, and he spent long
hours exploring the woods and drawing nature
sketches. He also loved hearing stories of American
frontier life and could remember watching Conestoga
wagons rolling west through Cincinnati.
After working for awhile as an engineer and
surveyor, Beard moved to New York City to attend art
school. He provided illustrations for many books and
magazines, including the first edition of Mark Twain’s
A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur’s Court in 1889.
It was there in New York that a chance encounter on a
city street pushed Beard toward an interest in young people.
One cold winter day, he happened on a group of newsboys—
boys who sold newspapers instead of going to school—sleeping
on the pavement beneath a statue of Benjamin Franklin.
That sight convinced him to begin what he called his “lifelong
crusade for American boyhood.”
In 1905, in the pages of Recreation magazine, Beard
created a boys’ program called the Sons of Daniel Boone.
It taught many of the same camping and nature skills as
Seton’s Woodcraft Indians, but Beard
used frontier language instead of
Indian terms. Members organized
themselves in “forts” and “stockades”
and took on the names of such
heroes as Daniel Boone (president),
Kit Carson (treasurer), and Davy
Crockett (secretary).
When Beard moved to Pictorial
Review magazine after spending some
time at Woman’s Home Companion,
he renamed the group the Boy
Pioneers of America. Then in 1909
he published a handbook, Boy
Pioneers and Sons of Daniel Boone.
Just like Seton, Beard would soon
play a role in the Scouting movement.
Seton, Baden-Powell, and Beard





SCOUTING HERITAGE 13
.Boyce, the Birth of Scouting in America, West, and Hillcourt
Boyce, the Birth of
Scouting in America,
West, and Hillcourt
In the early 1900s, all sorts of programs were cropping up to
serve American boys—including the Boy Scouts, the Woodcraft
Indians, and the Sons of Daniel Boone. Soon, a man named
William D. Boyce would stumble into the picture and forge
these and other groups into the Boy Scouts of America, the
country’s largest and most enduring youth organization.
William D. Boyce (1858–1929)
William Dickson Boyce could not have been more
different from Baden-Powell, Seton, and Beard.
Although he enjoyed big-game hunting, he was
not much of an outdoorsman. Instead, he was
a hardheaded businessman.
After leaving the Pennsylvania farm where he
had grown up, Boyce established himself
in business, eventually becoming a successful
newspaper publisher in Chicago. By the early
1900s, his Saturday Blade was the largest weekly
paper in America. He lived in a four-story
mansion and earned an estimated $350,000
a year (about $9.4 million in 2012 dollars).
Boyce believed in treating his newsboys right
and that their job of selling newspapers taught them about
responsibility and manners and helped prepare them for the
future.


14 SCOUTING HERITAGE
.Boyce, the Birth of Scouting in America, West, and Hillcourt.
In 1909, Boyce was in London, preparing for an African
safari, when he lost his way and met a boy of about 12 who
walked up and led him to his destination. Boyce offered him a
tip, but the boy declined, explaining that he was just doing his
daily good turn as a Boy Scout.
Boyce was so impressed by the Scout that he decided to
investigate further. He picked up a trunkful of publications at
Scout headquarters and studied them during his safari. Six
months later, on Feb. 8, 1910, he incorporated the Boy Scouts
of America.
Despite his interest in Scouting, Boyce had no
interest in running the BSA. He quickly turned its
leadership over to Edgar M. Robinson, the senior
boys’ work secretary of the YMCA’s International
Committee in New York. Boyce agreed to give the
BSA $1,000 per month for operating expenses
—provided that boys of all races and religions
be included—but that was the extent of
his involvement.
One reason for William D. Boyce’s success as a
newspaper publisher and businessman was the
army of up to 30,000 newsboys he employed across
the country. He felt responsible for their welfare and
saw the work as a way they could gain valuable
skills and become self-sufficient.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 15
..Boyce, the Birth of Scouting in America, West, and Hillcourt
The Early Days of Scouting America
As Robinson and other prominent leaders worked to get
Scouting organized in America, they reached out to Seton and
Beard, along with two other men who’d started their own
Scouting programs. All four agreed to merge their organizations
into the Boy Scouts of America.
Seton signed on as Chief Scout, while the other three
agreed to serve as national commissioners. “Uncle Dan”
Beard helped establish the outdoor skills that are still at the
heart of Scouting, and Seton wrote a temporary handbook
that combined his Birch-Bark Roll with Baden-Powell’s
Scouting for Boys.
In 1916, the U.S. Congress voted unanimously to give the BSA a federal charter,
which would protect the program from such groups as William Randolph Hearst’s
United States Boy Scouts.


.Boyce, the Birth of Scouting in America, West, and Hillcourt.
West appeared on the cover of TIME
magazine, which did an article about
the logistical challenges of the first
National Scout Jamboree in 1937.
This portrait of him, by Albert A. Rose,
had been commissioned by the BSA
in honor of West’s 25 years as Chief
Scout Executive.
The organizers’ most important task, however, was
to find a permanent leader for the organization.
The man they found had a deep interest in the
welfare of young people—and virtually no con-
tact with camping, nature, or other outdoor
pursuits. His name was James E. West.
James E. West (1876–1948)
Orphaned at age 6 and crippled by tuberculosis,
James Edward West didn’t have much of a
childhood. He had to fight for permission to
attend school outside his orphanage—and only
then if he kept up his many chores. He worked
hard, graduating from high school with honors
and then working his way through law school.
Not surprisingly, West focused on children’s
issues. He pushed for the creation of a juvenile court,
worked for organizations like the YMCA and the Washington
Playground Association, and convinced President Theodore
Roosevelt to convene a children’s conference at the White House.
He even volunteered to defend a boy in court who had stolen
his car!
Given his background, West was a natural
choice to serve as the first Chief Scout Executive.
He agreed to take the job for up to six months
and stayed on for 32 years.
With West in place, the organization was
ready to grow from a scattered collection of
independent troops into the country’s largest
and strongest youth movement.
West is credited
with persuading
the BSA to add
“brave, clean,
and reverent” to
the Scout Law.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 17
..Boyce, the Birth of Scouting in America, West, and Hillcourt
Participants in the 1937
National Scout Jamboree
gathered at the foot
of the Washington
Monument. There, they
paraded with hundreds
of American flags. Thus,
began a tradition that has
continued at every subse-
quent National Jamboree.
In 1964, Hillcourt
published a definitive
biography of BSA’s
founder — Baden-
Powell: The Two
Lives of a Hero.
William “Green Bar Bill” Hillcourt (1900–1992)
A protégé of Lord Baden-Powell’s, William “Green Bar Bill”
Hillcourt was the leading Scouter of the movement’s second
generation. Born in Denmark in 1900, at 10 his brother gave him
a copy of the Danish translation of Scouting for Boys. He
earned the equivalent of Eagle Scout and became a
Scoutmaster in Copenhagen. Hillcourt attended the first
World Jamboree in London in 1920. In 1925, he went to
New York, where he connected with Scouting friends
and soon earned a job with the BSA Supply Service.
After an elevator encounter at BSA headquarters
with Chief Scout Executive West, Hillcourt submitted an
18-page report to West outlining suggestions for
improving the patrol method. West hired Hillcourt to
write the first of many influential publications, the
Handbook for Patrol Leaders. The book was a success, in
part due to Hillcourt’s writing style, which he called “the
English of a 13-14-year-old American school boy.”
In 1932, Hillcourt became the assistant editor of Boys’
Life and wrote a regular feature of hints for patrol leaders. To
add a little mystery, he adopted the nickname “Green Bar Bill” in
reference to the two green bars on a patrol leader’s badge.
In 1935, to test ideas for his Scouting writing, he founded
Troop 1 in Mendham, New Jersey. In 1936 he was part of the first
Wood Badge courses in the United States, and in 1948 was
Scoutmaster for the first two standard American courses.
During his career, he wrote two editions of the Scoutmaster
Handbook, three editions of the Boy Scout Handbook, the first
Scout Field Book, and countless books and magazine articles.





SCOUTING HERITAGE 19
.A Century of Scouting
A Century of Scouting
It would take many, many pages to trace the history of Scouting
from 1910 until today. This chapter will highlight just a few of
the key events that happened in each decade since Scouting
America was founded.
1910s
Scouting’s first decade was busy. Boys’ Life (now Scout Life)
and Scouting magazines published their first issues. In addition,
the BSA held its first national Good Turn (promoting a safe and
sane Fourth of July), and the Order of the Arrow was founded.
When World War I started, Scouts sprang into action.
In support of the war effort, they accomplished the following:
• Planted 12,000 victory gardens
• Collected 100 railroad cars of nut hulls and peach pits for
the manufacture of gas-masks
• Located 21 million board feet of black walnut trees for
gunstocks and airplane propeller
• Distributed more than 300 million pieces of
government literature
• Sold more than $355 million worth of Liberty Loan bonds
and war savings stamps (That’s more than $7 billion in
2012 dollars.)
Scouts tending a WWI victory garden


20 SCOUTING HERITAGE
A Century of Scouting.
A Brief History of
Scout Life / Boys’ Life
In 1911, George S. Barton of Somerville,
Massachusetts, founded, edited, and
published the first edition of Boys’ Life,
calling it the “Boys’ and Boy Scouts’
Magazine.” He was not referring to the
Scouts we know today, but to the three
major competing Scouting organizations
of the time: the American Boy Scouts,
New England Boy Scouts, and the
Boy Scouts of America.
Barton’s first issue of Boys’ Life filled
eight pages and was published in January
1911. It featured articles such as “Things All
Scouts Should Know,” about haversack packing and making a drinking-
water filter. However, very few of the 5,000 printed copies actually
reached the public. The more commonly accepted first edition was
published in March 1911. It featured 48 pages and a two-color cover.
In 1912, Barton sold Boys’ Life to the BSA for $6,000 ($1 for each
subscriber). The first Boys’ Life magazine edited by James E. West,
then Chief Scout Executive, was the July 1912 issue.
Barton listed two goals in starting Boys’ Life: first, to give Scouts
a publication they could call their own; and second, to place in the
hands of all boys a magazine “which they will not be afraid to have
their parents see them reading.”
Those goals are reflected in today’s Scout Life, with its mix of
news, nature, sports, history, fiction, science, comics, and Scouting.
The magazine, which changed its name in 2021, continues to offer
entertaining stories and useful information to help all of its Scout
readers achieve rank advancements faster.
Find Scout Life online at scoutlife.org.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 21
.A Century of Scouting
During WWI, Scouts sold more than $355 million worth of Liberty Loan bonds and war
savings stamps. In today’s currency, that would be worth more than $7 billion.
What Are War Bonds?
Wars are expensive to fight. By 1918, World War I was costing about
$10 million an hour. To raise money for the war effort, the United
States government borrowed from individual citizens by selling them
war bonds and stamps. An advertising poster for Liberty Bonds read:
“If you can’t enlist—invest. Buy a Liberty Bond. Defend your country
with your dollars.” Scouts sold bonds under the slogan “Every Scout
to Save a Soldier.”


22 SCOUTING HERITAGE
A Century of Scouting.
1920s
American Scouts started exploring the world during the
1920s. Scouts from every state attended the First World
Scout Jamboree in 1920. In 1923, the program that would
become the Northern Tier National High Adventure
Bases began in Minnesota. In 1928, Sea Scout Paul Siple
accompanied Commander Richard E. Byrd on an 18-month
voyage to Antarctica, starting a tradition that lives on in
the Scouting Antarctic Scientific Program.
During the 1920s, the BSA also started reaching out to
young people in the African American, Native American,
Hispanic, and Japanese communities. The racist Ku Klux Klan
attacked the BSA for serving blacks, Catholics, and Jews.
Paul Siple, circa 1928


SCOUTING HERITAGE 23
.A Century of Scouting
1930s
The 1930s saw new opportunities for
younger brothers and older Scouts alike.
In 1930, the Cub Scout program began.
In 1935, Senior Scouting was created for
the older boys. As one of the program
options, Senior Scouts in troops were
called Explorers. In 1938, Oklahoma oil-
man Waite Phillips began donating the
land in Cimarron, New Mexico, that
later became Philmont Scout Ranch.
The Great Depression gripped
America through the decade. Scouts responded,
helping those in need by collecting 1.8 million items of
clothing, household furnishings, foodstuffs, and supplies.
The first National Scout Jamboree was held in 1937 in the
nation’s capital, in the shadow of the Washington Monument.
The 27,232 attendees enjoyed historical pageants, tours of
Washington, D.C., landmarks, a three-game baseball series
between the Washington Senators and the Boston Red Sox,
and a review by President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
Philmont, circa 1939
1937 National Scout Jamboree, Washington, D.C.


24 SCOUTING HERITAGE
A Century of Scouting.
1940s
The biggest event of the 1940s was World War II, which
affected every American family. Scouts were involved from
the very start. Right after the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor
in December 1941, Hawaiian Scouts set up first-aid stations
and emergency kitchens, helped evacuate civilians, served as
messengers, and manned 58 air-raid sirens around Honolulu.
In 1942, Air Scouting, a program for boys 15 and older, was
created in cooperation with the United States Army Air Corps.
Scouts across the country collected 10 million used books for servicemen overseas
and in stateside hospitals.
During WWII, Scouts collected nearly 26,000 tons of scrap metal—
pots, pans, even old keys—that would be turned into warplanes.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 25
.A Century of Scouting
Throughout the war, the BSA
responded to 69 government requests for
assistance. Scouts collected 210,000 tons
of scrap metal, 590,000 tons of wastepaper,
and enough milkweed floss to make nearly
2 million life jackets. They distributed
millions of government posters, created
184,000 Victory gardens, and planted
nearly 2 million trees to replace those
harvested for the war effort.
1950s
Early in the 1950s, Scouting membership
reached 3 million for the first time. A few
years later, as the first postwar babies
reached Cub Scout age, membership
began growing by 200,000 or more a year.
Many of those new Cub Scouts tried
out a new activity called the pinewood
derby, which began in 1953. Boy Scouts
also had the chance to participate in three
National Scout Jamborees. Explorers enjoyed an expanded
program that let them explore careers and hobbies.
These Japanese American Scouts were
interned with their families at Heart
Mountain Relocation Center in Wyoming
during WWII. Here, they conduct a morn-
ing flag raising ceremony.
The pinewood derby, which was created in 1953 by
Cubmaster Don Murphy, remains one of Cub Scouting’s
most popular traditions.


26 SCOUTING HERITAGE
A Century of Scouting.
During the 1950s, Scouts participated in several national
Good Turns. They collected 2 million pounds of clothing for
domestic and foreign relief, distributed 1 million posters and
30 million doorknob hangers as part of a get-out-the-vote
campaign, and delivered 40 million emergency handbooks
and 50,000 posters prepared by the Office of Civil
Defense Mobilization.
1960s
The 1960s opened and closed with Scouting firsts. In 1960,
John F. Kennedy became the first former Scout to be elected
president of the United States. Nine years later, Eagle Scout
Neil Armstrong became the first man to walk on the moon,
fulfilling President Kennedy’s dream of sending men into space.
Many Scout troops, like this one from Los Angeles, forged strong
musical traditions.
John F. Kennedy
was the first former
Scout to become
president of the
United States.
Of the 12 men
who would
eventually walk
on the moon,
11 were
former Scouts.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 27
.A Century of Scouting
The BSA responded to changing times in 1965 by creating
the Inner-City/Rural program to expand Scouting beyond the
suburbs. Scouting officials created storefront Scout centers and
worked aggressively to bring Scouting to urban areas—sometimes
competing directly with gang leaders to win recruits.
1970s
As the 1970s dawned, BSA officials worried that Scouting was
not in tune with the times, so they overhauled the Boy Scout
program to put less emphasis on outdoor skills. The experiment
didn’t last long. In 1978, the program returned to its roots with
revised requirements.
National Good Turns in the 1970s focused on the environment.
Tens of thousands of Scouting units started recycling programs
and planted trees to fight erosion. On one day alone in 1971,
Scouts collected more than 1 million tons of litter.
Scouting icon William
“Green Bar Bill” Hillcourt
shares a nature lesson with
Scouts from five nations at
the 1967 World Jamboree,
which the BSA hosted.
These Scouts repair a footbridge across a mountain stream.
Conservation work became even more visible with the launching
of Scouting’s Project SOAR (Save Our American Resources) in 1970.


28 SCOUTING HERITAGE
A Century of Scouting.
The BSA’s high-adventure programs grew during the 1970s.
In 1975, volunteers began a sailing program in Florida that
would evolve into the Sea Base.
1980s
The 1980s saw the creation of several enduring Scouting traditions.
In 1981, the National Scout Jamboree moved to Fort A.P. Hill,
Virginia, where the next eight Jamborees would be held.
In 1982, a new Scout uniform created by fashion designer
Oscar de la Renta appeared; with minor changes it would
remain the official uniform until 2008. Then in 1988, the BSA
introduced the Scouting for Food National Good Turn, which
collected 65 million containers of food in its first year alone.
Even since its earliest
days, Scouting has always
welcomed members with
disabilities and encouraged
their mainstream participa-
tion in the program.
In the 1980s,
the BSA began
tackling what it
called “the five
unacceptables”:
hunger, drug abuse,
child abuse,
illiteracy, and
unemployment.
In 1987, the BSA
launched “Drugs:
A Deadly Game,”
which became
the nation’s
largest drug-abuse
education campaign.
Challenge courses became popular attractions at Scout camps in the 1980s. A typical
course featured team-building games, zip lines, and challenges such as this fidget ladder.


.A Century of Scouting
Two Scouting programs got their start in the 1980s.
Tiger Cubs began in 1982, and Varsity Scouting was
officially adopted in 1984.
1990s
The biggest event of the 1990s was the creation
of Venturing, a program for young men and
young women, which took in the parts of the
Exploring program that weren’t career-related.
Exploring became the worksite-based part of
Learning for Life, which also includes Scouting
America’s school-based programs.
After the breakup of the Soviet Union, the
organization began helping to restart the Russian
Scouting movement, which had been outlawed after
the Russian Revolution in 1917. In 1993, the
World Friendship Fund helped produce a new
Russian Scout handbook.
Scouting’s long-standing commitment to the
environment took a big step forward in 1998, when
it adopted the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and
the Outdoor Code as its guideline for protecting the
environment while conducting outdoor activities.
In 1982, Alexander Holsinger of
Normal, Illinois, became the millionth
Eagle Scout.
In 1988, the BSA introduced the Scouting for
Food National Good Turn.
Venturers, circa 1998
In 1998, Scouting adopted guidelines for protecting
the environment while conducting all outdoor
activities, including horseback riding.


A Century of Scouting.
2000s
The Boy Scouts of America reached a notable milestone in 2000
when the 100-millionth Scout was registered.
In 2004, the BSA created the Good Turn for America
program, joining forces with the Salvation Army, the American
Red Cross, and Habitat for Humanity to address the issues of
hunger, homelessness/inadequate housing, and poor health.
The decade’s biggest service project was ArrowCorps5
(pronounced “arrow core five”). During the summer of 2008,
some 3,800 members of the Order of the Arrow contributed
more than $5 million worth of labor on behalf of five national
forests. It was the BSA’s largest national service project since
World War II and the largest such project ever to benefit the
U.S. Forest Service.
Late in the decade, the BSA began planning for a new
permanent location for the National Scout Jamboree and a new
high-adventure base. Both can now be found at the Summit
Bechtel Reserve in West Virginia.
Scouts in action with a Good Turn for America
In June 2009, Anthony Thomas of Lakeville,
Minnesota, became the two-millionth Eagle Scout.
Anthony, who was adopted from Korea, counseled
Korean adoptees at a Korean cultural camp and
also assisted with Hurricane Katrina restoration in
New Orleans.


.A Century of Scouting
2010s
The decade saw BSA increase the diversity of membership and
the program opportunities members can enjoy.
In 2013, BSA affirmed that Scouting welcomes all eligible
youth—regardless of race, ethnic background, or sexual
orientation—who are willing to accept Scouting’s values and
meet any other requirements of membership.
In 2015 membership changes led to welcoming girls into
Cub Scouts and Boy Scouts, which was renamed Scouts BSA.
Girls first joined packs in 2018 and troops in 2019.
In 2018, BSA included pre-kindergarten boys and girls in
the new Lion program. That same year, BSA announced it
would discontinue a program for older youth, Varsity Scouting.
The decade also saw growth in high adventure. The
National Eagle Scout Association launched the World Explorer
program in 2012, in which Eagles join professional research
teams in scientific work in places like the Galápagos Islands,
Mammoth Cave, Amazon rainforest and South Africa.
In 2013, after four years of development, SBR opened its
11,400 acres with the 18th National Scout Jamboree welcoming
40,795 Scouts, Venturers, leaders and staff.
In 2015, in an effort to streamline the Scouting programs,
Cub Scouts and Venturers joined with the Scouts BSA and Sea
Scouts in adopting the use of the Scout Oath
and Scout Law.
The decade ended with another big event
at SBR, the 24th World Scout Jamboree, hosted
by the Scout associations of Canada, Mexico,
and the United States. Some 43,000 youth,
leaders and staff from 145 countries attended.
2020s
In February 2021, Scouting welcomed its first
cohort of female Eagle Scouts, with nearly
1,000 young women from across the country
taking their places in history. The first class
of female Eagles earned more than 30,000
merit badges and provided an estimated
130,000 hours of community service—even
amid a worldwide pandemic.
S P E C I A L D I G I T A L E D I T I O N
FEBRUARY 2021 scoutlife.org
From the publisher of
Boys’ Life
since 1911
Saluting The
Inaugur al
Class of
Female
Eagle
Scouts
0221 cover ideas.indd 1 2/9/21 3:32 PM
SCOUTING HERITAGE 31





SCOUTING HERITAGE 33
.Scouting for Every Age
Scouting for Every Age
When Scouting began, there was just one program, Boy
Scouting, which served boys ages 12 through 17. That soon
changed, however, as the BSA began developing programs
first for teens and then for younger boys.
Scouts BSA (formerly Boy Scouts)
Pick up the 1911 Handbook for Boys, and you will find a
program that is pretty similar to today’s Scout program.
From its earliest days, Boy Scouts, now called Scouts BSA,
featured the same basic advancement program, troop
structure, leadership positions, and focus on outdoor skills.
That is not to say that things have stayed exactly the
same, however. In fact, many details have changed over
the years.
Advancement
Originally, Tenderfoot, Second Class, and First
Class were considered the only ranks. There
was no Scout badge, and Life Scout, Star
Scout, and Eagle Scout (in
that order!) were special
awards that First Class
Scouts could receive
for earning extra
merit badges.


34 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Scouting for Every Age.
The list of merit badges
has changed many times to reflect
changes in Scout skills, hobbies, and
career interests. Early Scouts could
earn merit badges in signaling,
stalking (tracking), and taxidermy—
in addition to such newfangled topics
as automobiling and aviation. Scouts
in the 1930s could earn a dozen or so
merit badges related to agriculture,
including Beef Production, Corn
Farming, and Farm Layout and
Building Arrangements. In the
1960s, as times changed, Atomic
Energy (now Nuclear Science),
Computers (now Digital Technology),
Electronics, and Space Exploration
were introduced.
As technological advances
continued, in the early 21st century
numerous “high tech” merit badges
were added (Programming, Animation, Game
Design) along with the revival of some old Scouting skill merit
badges (Signs, Signals, and Codes and Exploration).
See all the merit badges ever offered at usscouts.org/mb/history.asp.
Beekeeping MarksmanshipMetals Engineering
SignalingPigeon Raising
Boy Scouts in uniform, circa 1928


SCOUTING HERITAGE 35
.Scouting for Every Age
Joining Requirements
At first, boys had to be 12 years old to join a Boy Scout troop. The minimum age
was lowered to 11 in 1949, and in 1972 completion of the fifth grade was added as
an option. Today, boys and girls must have completed the fifth grade and be at least
10 years old, or be 11 years old, or have earned the Arrow of Light Award in Cub
Scouting and be at least 10 years old to join a troop.
For most of the BSA’s history, youth had to complete the Tenderfoot rank
requirements to become full-fledged Scouts. In 1972, however, a new set of joining
requirements appeared. Prospective Scouts now had to understand the Scout Oath,
Law, motto, slogan, salute, sign, handclasp, badge, and the Outdoor Code and
complete a personal growth agreement conference (what we now call a Scoutmaster
conference). Starting in 1978, Scouts who completed the joining requirements
received the Boy Scout badge, now called the Scout rank.
From time to time, advancement requirements are modified to keep
up with changing times. For example, starting in 2014, the Cooking
merit badge is required to earn the Eagle Scout rank. Eagle Scout can-
didates can also now choose between earning the Environmental
Science or Sustainability merit badges. Today’s Scouts can select from
a wide range of more than 130 merit badge topics. Chess, Game
Design, Geocaching, Inventing, Kayaking, Programming, Robotics,
Scouting Heritage, Scuba Diving, Search and Rescue, Sustainability,
and Welding have all been introduced since 2009.


36 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Scouting for Every Age.
Sea Scouts, Exploring, Venturing,
and Other Young-Adult Programs
The development of Scouting is pretty straightforward,
but the development of the BSA’s programs for older Scouts
has more twists and turns than a detective novel.
Sea Scouts
The first older-youth program, Sea Scouting, came to the United
States in 1912, when Arthur A. Carey of Massachusetts started
a Sea Scout group using his schooner, the Pioneer. The program
limped along until Commander Thomas J. Keane of Chicago
took over in 1922.
Keane revamped the program, introducing an advancement
program that included four ranks: Apprentice, Ordinary, Able,
and Quartermaster. This system is still in use today.
Sea Scouting became known as Sea Exploring in 1949,
but the program didn’t change much. A couple of important
things happened in 1971.
First, girls were allowed to
become Sea Explorers.
Second, the program
expanded to include
powerboats and other
aquatic activities like scuba
diving, water-skiing, and
oceanography.
In 1998, Sea Exploring
became part of the new
Venturing program, and the
name was changed again,
this time to Sea Scouts. Sea
Scout ships (the equivalent
In 1984, the BSA introduced Varsity Scouting, aimed
at boys ages 14 but not yet 18 years old. Varsity
Scouting used sports terminology and offered high-
adventure activities geared for older Scouts. Varsity
Scouts used the same advancement program as Boy
Scouts, but they could also earn the Denali Award.
Varsity Scouting was discontinued in 2018.
Early Sea Scouts in action


SCOUTING HERITAGE 37
.Scouting for Every Age
of packs and troops) now flourish in
communities across America—even far from
oceans or major rivers. Every two years, Sea
Scouts from around the country compete in
the William I. Koch International Sea Scout
Cup, a weeklong sailing event. Today Sea
Scouting is again a standalone program.
In Sea Scouting, the Ordinary rank is
the equivalent of the Bronze Award, the
Able rank is the equivalent of the Gold
Award, and the Quartermaster rank is
the equivalent of the Silver Award.
Sea Scouts also began in
England. Baden-Powell’s older
brother, Warrington, wrote the
first Sea Scout Manual, basing
the program on the traditions
of the sea.
The Sea Promise (introduced in 1920)
As a Sea Scout I promise to do my best:
To guard against water accidents;
To know the location and proper use of the lifesaving devices on every
boat I board;
To be prepared to render aid to those in need;
To seek to preserve the motto of the sea, “Women and children first.”


38 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Scouting for Every Age.
Exploring
In 1935, the BSA created a program called Explorer Scouts as
one option in Senior Scouting. It offered to older Boy Scouts
a land-based alternative to Sea Scouting.
Explorer Scouts initially wore the same uniform as Boy
Scouts, although it featured an “Explorer Scout, BSA” strip
over the right pocket. In the 1940s, a forest-green uniform was
introduced, and Explorer Scout units began to be called posts
instead of troops.
Explorer Scouts got their
own advancement program
in 1944. The four ranks—
Apprentice, Woodsman,
Frontiersman, and Ranger—
corresponded to the four ranks
in Sea Scouting.
In 1949, Explorer Scouts
became simply Explorers,
and the program’s focus was
expanded to include social
activities, service opportunities,
and career exploration. In 1959,
the four-rank advancement
program was dropped, and Exploring
began to include six experience areas:
citizenship, service, social, voca-
tional, outdoor, and personal
fitness. More and more, posts began
to specialize in specific careers
or hobbies.
A couple of important things
happened in 1971. First, Exploring
became coeducational, with young women
eligible for full membership. Second, the
upper age was raised from 17 to 20, allowing
many college students to remain active.
The biggest change to Exploring came in 1998. That year,
Exploring divided into two completely separate programs:
Exploring and Venturing. Exploring took in the career-oriented
programs. At the same time, Venturing took in the posts that
focused on the outdoors or that were associated with church
youth groups or Scout troops.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 39
.Scouting for Every Age
Air Scouts
In 1942, the BSA introduced Air Scouts,
an aviation-focused alternative to Sea
Scouts and Explorer Scouts. Squadrons
of Air Scouts weren’t allowed to actually
fly, but they learned all about aircraft,
weather, radio communications, and more.
At first, Air Scouts had a four-level
advancement program: Apprentice,
Observer, Craftsman, and Ace. In 1947,
ratings were added to recognize
specialized knowledge.
Air Scouts became Air Explorers in 1949. In 1966, the
program became Aviation Exploring and started focusing
more on career exploration than advancement.
Venturing
As mentioned earlier, Venturing was officially
created in 1998, although it traces its roots
back to Scouting’s earliest days. In Venturing
crews, young adults have opportunities to
advance their skills and knowledge in a wide
variety of subjects. Venturers are encouraged to explore their
interests and passions.
Air Scout, circa 1940s
The Venturing Motto: Lead the Adventure!


40 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Scouting for Every Age.
Cub Scouts
The last age group the BSA addressed was boys too young to
be in Boy Scouting. Introduced in 1930, Cub Scouting would
eventually become the biggest segment of Scouting.
Wolf Cubs began in England in 1916, when Baden-Powell
published The Wolf Cub’s Handbook. Baden-Powell’s program
drew heavily on the characters and symbols in The Jungle
Book, which his friend Rudyard Kipling had written in 1894.
Venturers may work on the four Venturing ranks (Venturing, Discovery,
Pathfinder, and Summit), which serve as benchmarks along a Venturer’s journey.
These ranks follow the Venturing ALPS program model, which provides a framework
for a dynamic program of Adventure, Leadership, Personal growth, and Service. They
are designed to work with crews of any specialization. Other Venturing awards
recognize special achievement in outdoor skills (the Ranger Award), sports (the Quest
Award), and religious life (the TRUST Award).
Rover Scouts
Starting around 1928, an imported British program called Rover Scouts
appeared in the United States. Designed to serve young people who
were too old to be Explorer Scouts, Rover Scouts became an official
BSA program in 1933. The program didn’t last very long, in part because
many of the young men who were eligible to be Rover Scouts were off
at college or—after 1941—fighting in World War II.
Venturing
Discovery Summit Patch
Pathfinder
Summit Medal
Ranger
Quest
Trust


.Scouting for Every Age
Like Boy Scouting, Wolf Cubs quickly jumped the Atlantic,
unofficially. In 1925, BSA began planning an official American
version, which was launched in 1930. American Cub Scouting
retained much of the flavor of Kipling’s Jungle Book. But thanks
to Ernest Thompson Seton, who helped to develop Cub Scouting
in the United States, it also emphasized American Indian lore.
At first, Cub Scouts advanced from Bobcat (for all new
members) to Wolf rank (age 9), Bear (age 10), and Lion (age 11),
and then joined a Boy Scout troop at age 12. The joining age was
dropped by a year in 1949 and again in 1986, and in 1988 the
Webelos Scout program was expanded to two years. (That program,
which featured a distinctive uniform and a set of 15—later 20—
activity badges, had replaced the Lion program in 1967.)
The Arrow of Light Award became Cub Scouting’s highest
award in 1978. That year, five ranks were established: Bobcat,
Wolf, Bear, Webelos, and Arrow of Light Award.
In 1982, the Tiger Cub program for 7-year-olds was
introduced. At first, Tiger Cubs functioned separately from the
Cub Scout pack. In 2001 Tiger Cub groups became Tiger Cub
dens that were a part of the pack. In 2018 a new pre-kindergarten
program called Lion was inaugurated. Later that year the entire
Cub Scout program (Lion through Webelos) welcomed both boys
and girls into all of its programs.
The Cub Promise (original three-line version introduced in 1930):
I, (name), promise to do my best
To be square and
To obey the Law of the Pack.
The line “to do my duty to God and
my country” was added in 1950, and the
old-fashioned phrase “to be square” was
replaced with “to help other people” in 1972.
At first, the term
“Webelos” came
from the first
letters of the
Cub Scout ranks
(Wolf, Bear, and
Lion) and Scout.
When the original
Lion rank was
dropped, the
meaning was
changed to “WE’ll
BE LOyal Scouts.”





SCOUTING HERITAGE 43
.Ultimate Scouting Adventures
Ultimate Scouting
Adventures
For many Scouts, a trip to a BSA high-adventure base represents
the ultimate Scouting adventure. Others enjoy the chance to
meet Scouts from around the country at a National Scout
Jamboree or Scouts from around the globe at a world jamboree.
These high-adventure opportunities are an important part of
Scouting’s heritage. Many date back to Scouting’s earliest years.
BSA High-Adventure Bases
Today, Scouting America operates high-adventure programs at
four locations: the Northern Tier National High Adventure
Program in Minnesota, Philmont Scout Ranch in New Mexico
(including the Double H High Adventure Base), the Sea Base in
the Florida Keys, and the Paul R. Christen National High
Adventure Base at the Summit Bechtel Reserve in West Virginia.
Each year, more than 60,000 Scouts and Venturers partici-
pate in these programs—with thousands more on waiting lists.
Over the years, Scouting has also operated high-
adventure bases in Kentucky and Maine. (The latter
base is now run by the Katahdin Area Council.)
Many councils also run high-adventure pro-
grams. Visit usscouts.org/ha/ha.asp for a directory.


44 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Ultimate Scouting Adventures.
Northern Tier National High Adventure Program
In 1923, the Hibbing Area Council in Minnesota began
organizing canoe trips into the Boundary Waters along
the U.S.–Canada border. Three years later, the BSA’s
Region X took over the program. It then became known
as the Region X Canoe Trails and later the Region X
Wilderness Canoe Trips.
At first, the canoe program didn’t have a permanent
home. Instead it started at various locations near the town
of Ely. That changed when a lodge was built on the shore of
Moose Lake. Dedicated on May 17, 1942, it was named for
Charles L. Sommers, longtime chairman of the Region X
Committee, as well as a canoe trip organizer, participant, and
avid supporter.
Within a few years, the base was renamed the Charles L.
Sommers Wilderness Canoe Base. In 1972, it became part of
the BSA’s national high-adventure program.
Today, the Sommers Canoe Base is just one of three bases
that are part of the Northern Tier National High Adventure
Program. Northern Tier also includes the Donald Rogert Canoe
Base in Atikokan, Ontario, and the Northern Expeditions Canoe
Base in Bissett, Manitoba—a site best reached by float plane.
Although names and locations have changed over the
years, Northern Tier offers today’s Scouts a wilderness experi-
ence much like that enjoyed by the Scouts of the 1920s. With
the support of an Interpreter (sometimes called a “Charlie
Guide”), crews paddle and portage through miles of unspoiled
wilderness, enjoying fresh fish, succulent blueberries, and
great fellowship.
Northern Tier
canoeists often
hail each other
by shouting
“Holy-Ry”—the
name of a rye
cracker popular
with crews in the
1950s and 1960s.
The proper
response to
“Holy-Ry” is
“Red-eye,” which
crews call their
lunchtime drinks
after a term used
by early loggers in
the area.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 45
.Ultimate Scouting Adventures
Philmont Scout Ranch
Early in 1938, BSA president Walter W. Head received a surpris-
ing letter. It was written by an Oklahoma oilman named Waite
Phillips, who owned a 300,000-acre ranch near Cimarron,
New Mexico. The successful businessman wanted to give a
large piece of this ranch to the Boy Scouts of America. Scout
officials—including Mr. Head and Chief Scout Executive James
E. West—visited Phillips’ Philmont Ranch and were quickly
captivated by the land and its potential.
On Oct. 20, 1938, the National Executive Board formally
accepted Phillips’ gift of 35,857 acres of land, along with
$50,000 for use in building a camp. They decided to call the
new camp Philturn Rockymountain Scoutcamp, a name that
would memorialize Phillips’ good turn to Scouting.
Philmont, circa 1938
The original entry gate to Philmont Ranch


46 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Ultimate Scouting Adventures.
Phillips retained the rest of his ranch, which included his
palatial vacation home, the Villa Philmonte. He often rode his
favorite horse, Gus, up to the new Scout camp to watch the
Scouts in action, and he liked what he saw. In fact, he liked it
so much that in 1941, he gave the BSA another 91,538 acres of
land, including the Villa Philmonte, four lodges in the Sangre
de Cristo Mountains, and the buildings and facilities at ranch
headquarters. With the new gift, Philturn Rockymountain
Scoutcamp became Philmont Scout Ranch.
Early programs at Philmont involved long-term camping
at sites like Ponil, Philturn’s original headquarters. Those sites
served as starting points for hiking and horseback riding, along
with more than 200 miles of trails. By 1956, however, Philmont
was specializing in 12-day backpacking treks. For more than a
decade, crews could plan their own itineraries. Then in 1969
a system of preplanned itineraries was introduced. With some
changes, it is still in use today.
Villa Philmonte
Philmont’s Tooth of Time
Waite Phillips
also donated the
23-story Philtower
Building in Tulsa,
Oklahoma, so that
the rental income
from the building
could help pay
for camp
improvements.
Much of what
Phillips earned he
gave away—and
not just to the BSA.
His 72-room
mansion in Tulsa is
now the Philbrook
Museum of Art,
and he left millions
of dollars to
charities and
colleges in
both Oklahoma
and California.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 47
.Ultimate Scouting Adventures
Sea Base
In 1975, a group of volunteers from Miami and Atlanta
developed a sailing program in the waters around the
Florida Keys. For the first few years, Sam Wampler, who
was the South Florida Council’s camping director, ran the
program in his spare time—using his station wagon and
a warehouse as the headquarters. In 1979, Wampler
became the first full-time director of what was then called
the Florida Gateway to High Adventure.
A grant of $1.3 million from the Fleischmann Foundation
funded the 1979 purchase of the old Tollgate Inn motel and
marina on Lower Matecumbe Key, about halfway between
Miami and Key West. In 1980, the facility opened with a new
name: the Florida National High Adventure Sea Base.
In 1982, the BSA was given an untouched, uninhabited
island off Big Pine Key called Big Munson Island. The addition
of the Brinton Environmental Center on Summerland Key in
2001 offered improved access to the island and gave the base a
second jumping-off point for activities.
Today, the Sea Base offers 11 different programs in the
Florida Keys and the Bahamas. Each year, thousands of
visitors enjoy sailing, scuba diving, fishing, swimming,
snorkeling, and camping.
The Sea Base today


48 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Ultimate Scouting Adventures.
Summit Bechtel Reserve
The BSA’s newest high-adventure base is the result of another
donation. Through his charitable foundation, Distinguished
Eagle Scout Stephen D. Bechtel Jr. donated $50 million to the
BSA to create a huge Scouting paradise in the mountains of
West Virginia. The Summit Bechtel Reserve opened in 2013,
becoming home to the Paul R. Christen National High
Adventure Base, the James C. Justice National Scout Camp, and
the permanent home of the National Scout Jamboree, as well as
providing facilities for cutting-edge youth and adult leadership
training.
Located on 10,600 acres adjacent to the New River Gorge
National Park and Preserve, SBR offers access to incredible
outdoor terrain in the Appalachian Mountains that provides a
home for some of the world’s best whitewater rafting, rock
climbing, and mountain biking.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 49
.Ultimate Scouting Adventures
In addition to its outdoor adventure, SBR offers
lessons in sustainability. The BSA has pledged to work toward
a “net zero” property, meaning SBR will produce as much
energy as it uses, use minimal water, treat wastewater without
chemicals, and recycle and compost waste. The goal is for
SBR to be the most environmentally friendly BSA camp
on Earth.
National and World Jamborees
Some Scouts seek high-adventure opportunities in the solitude
of the Boundary Waters, the Sangre de Cristo Mountains, the
Gulf of Mexico, or the New River Gorge. For others, the
ultimate Scouting adventure is spending 10 days with thousands
of other Scouts at a national or world jamboree.
To find out how you can attend a future National
Jamboree, contact your local council or go to
jamboree.scouting.org. For information on world
jamborees, go to www.scout.org/events.


50 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Ultimate Scouting Adventures.
World Scout Jamborees
Once Scouting began to spread throughout the British Empire
and beyond, Baden-Powell saw how it could foster understand-
ing between people of different countries. In 1917—three years
into World War I—he wrote, “It is not too much to hope that in
the years to come, with increasing numbers joining this frater-
nity in the coming generation, they will unite in personal
friendship and mutual understanding such as never before and
thus find a solution to these horrendous international conflicts.”
Baden-Powell started planning for an international gather-
ing of Scouts as early as 1913. He wanted it to coincide with
the 10th anniversary of the Brownsea Island encampment, but
the event had to wait until 1920—two years after the end of
World War I. That summer, 8,000 Scouts from 21 countries
and 12 British dependencies arrived in London for the first
jamboree (an American slang term Baden-Powell chose that
means “noisy celebration or merrymaking”). The Scouts,
including 301 Americans, enjoyed eight days of Scouting
games, exhibitions, and parades.
The jamboree’s highlight came during an August 6
gathering of the participants. When Baden-Powell rose to speak,
a Scout in the audience shouted, “Long live the Chief Scout of
the World!” Thousands of other Scouts took up the call, and
Baden-Powell was officially crowned the first—and only—Chief
Scout of the World.
Since the 1920 event, world jamborees have been held
roughly every four years in locations around the globe (including
the United States in 1967 and 2019). Jamborees were suspended
during World War II, however, and the 1979 jamboree in Iran
was canceled due to the
revolution in that country. In
2011, the 22nd World Scout
Jamboree was held in Sweden.
Over 38,000 Scouts and leaders
from 154 countries attended.
Japan hosted the 23rd World
Scout Jamboree in 2015. In
2019, the 24th World Jamboree
was held in the United States,
which welcomed over 43,000
Scouts and leaders from 145
countries.The 22nd World Scout Jamboree, Sweden, 2011
The World Scout
Jamboree
returned to the
United States in
2019 with
the Scout
organizations of
Canada and
Mexico joining the
BSA as co-hosts.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 51
.Ultimate Scouting Adventures
National Scout Jamborees
Based on the success of early world jamborees, the BSA
began planning its own Jamboree. This first National Jamboree
was to be held in Washington, D.C., in 1935 to mark the
25th anniversary of American Scouting. Unfortunately, just
two weeks before the event, an outbreak of polio—for which
there was not yet a vaccine—forced the event’s cancellation.
Two years later in 1937, the Jamboree was finally held,
bringing together 27,232 Scouts and leaders from every state
and 24 foreign countries. The Jamboree was headquartered
near the Washington Monument with campsites spread around
the Tidal Basin and on nearby Columbia Island.
World War II delayed the next National Jamboree until
1950, when 47,163 Scouts and leaders descended on Valley
Forge, Pennsylvania. Since then, National Jamborees have been
held roughly every four years at locations around the country.
From 1981 through 2010, Fort A.P. Hill, Virginia, served as the
Jamboree’s home. With the 2013 National Scout Jamboree, the
event moved to its new home at SBR in West Virginia.
In 1973, for the
first and only time,
the National
Jamboree was
held in two
locations: Farragut
State Park in
Idaho and Moraine
State Park in
Pennsylvania.
The combined
attendance
was 73,610.
The 1969 National Scout Jamboree,
Farragut State Park, Idaho
ATV-riding at the 2013
National Scout Jamboree





SCOUTING HERITAGE 53
.Preserving Scouting Heritage
Preserving Scouting
Heritage
In the past century, Scouting America has produced countless
handbooks, uniforms, patches, pins, coins, calendars, statuettes,
pocketknives, backpacks, canteens, and other items. Scouts
have appeared on T-shirts and coffee mugs, in comic strips
and feature films, and as action figures and bobblehead dolls.
Collecting items related to Scouting history can be an
enjoyable hobby. So can hearing the stories of people who
were involved in Scouting before you were born—whether
they are members of your own family or part of your Scout
unit or community.
If you enjoy the monthly Pee
Wee Harris comics in Scout Life
magazine, you might like to collect
the originals. Pee Wee began life in
the 1920s as the hero of a series
of novels by Percy Keese Fitzhugh,
one of many writers who churned
out Scout novels in the early
20th century.
Fitzhugh’s novels were
approved by Scouting, unlike the
many novels that put Scout charac-
ters in dangerous situations and
had “no moral purpose,” accord-
ing to Chief Scout Librarian
Franklin K. Mathiews. For more
information on Fitzhugh, visit
www.bridgeboro.com.


54 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Preserving Scouting Heritage.
The International Scouting Collectors Association
offers a series of free articles on getting started
in collecting at www.scouttrader.org/collecting/.
Cubbook, circa 1930
What Makes Scouting
Memorabilia Valuable
People who collect things sometimes focus on how much
their collections are worth. But things can be valuable
for many reasons—most of which have nothing to do
with money.
Some Scouting memorabilia is valuable because
it is rare. For example, a patch from the canceled
1935 National Scout Jamboree or a letter signed by
Lord Baden-Powell would be a treasure to own. Other
memorabilia is valuable because it shows what Scouting
was like during an earlier time. An old Scout handbook,
for example, can tell you what the Scout uniform
once looked like, how rank requirements have changed
(or stayed the same), and what sorts of activities
Scouts used to enjoy.
Still other memorabilia is valuable because you have
a personal connection to it, such as your own merit


SCOUTING HERITAGE 55
.Preserving Scouting Heritage
badge sash. If you are lucky
enough to have your grandfa-
ther’s merit badge sash, for
example, then you have quite a
treasure indeed—one that you
will want to take very good care
of and keep.
You may have already
started your own memorabilia
collection without realizing it. Do
you have a drawer full of Scout
T-shirts or a shoebox full of camp
or Order of the Arrow patches?
Those items are important
because each has a story to tell. As time goes on, these items
may represent special memories that money cannot buy—
priceless moments that you will treasure for years to come.
Taking Care of Scouting Memorabilia
When you own a piece of Scouting memorabilia, you have
a responsibility to take care of it. That means protecting it
from things that can damage it—including your own hands.
Human hands produce oils that are acidic and can damage
paper and cloth collectibles, so it’s a good idea to always wash
your hands before handling the items in your collection. You
may even want to wear white cotton gloves, especially when
handling very fragile items. And be sure to keep your collection
away from food and drinks.
The environment where you store or display your collection
can also cause damage. Try to avoid prolonged exposure to
sunlight, which can quickly cause colors to fade. Also, don’t
store your collection in a place where the temperature and
humidity level frequently change, such as your basement,
attic, or garage, or near chemicals.
One good way to store your collection is to keep it in
one or more stackable plastic bins in an interior closet.
These bins, which don’t need to be airtight, can be found at
most discount stores. Lay items flat inside, and put heavier
items on the bottom.
You won’t want to keep your collection tucked away in
your closet. When you get ready to display it, do so in a way
that doesn’t cause damage. Rather than glue patches in an
To keep these
memories intact,
consider jotting
down a sentence
or two to go with
each item just
to refresh your
memory about
the experiences
that went along
with them.
Be sure the
protective sleeves
you use are made
of polyester film
and are advertised
as “acid free,”
because acid and
other chemicals
can be harmful to
your collectibles
over time.


56 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Preserving Scouting Heritage.
album, for example, purchase vinyl album pages with separate
pockets for the patches (similar to what baseball-card collectors
use). You can also keep items in separate zip-top bags. Then
slip a card inside each bag with details about the item.
Use collecting supplies that are labeled acid- and PVC-free
or “archival quality.” Never apply tape, glue, labels, or staples.
The National Scouting Museum
The National Scouting Museum at Philmont Scout Ranch
houses the world’s most extensive collection of Scouting
artifacts and memorabilia. There, too, are experts on collecting,
preserving, and displaying the objects that tell the story of
Scouting. The museum, originally called the Johnson Historical
Museum, opened in the former national BSA office in North
Brunswick, New Jersey, in 1959. In 1986 it moved to Murray
State University in Murray, Kentucky, and in 2002 relocated to a
building adjacent to the current national office Irving, Texas. In
2018, the museum settled into its home at Philmont.
The museum houses more than 600,000 artifacts—an origi-
nal 1910 BSA uniform to a 1924 Eagle Scout patch that spent
170 days circling Earth aboard the International Space Station in
2022 with Eagle Scout and NASA astronaut Kjell Lindgren.
Among its most significant holdings are papers from Scouting
founders Robert Baden-Powell, James E. West, and Ernest
Thompson Seton, and the first Eagle Scout medal ever awarded.
The museum features five galleries: Smart Family
Foundation Scouting Heritage Gallery, Ingram Order of the Arrow
Gallery, Philmont Gallery, Santa Fe Trail—
Northeast New Mexico Gallery, and Ernest
Thompson Seton Gallery. It is also home to the
Ernest Thompson Seton Memorial Library.
If you elect to complete requirement 4(b)
and wish to contact the Scouting Museum,
address your request to:
Scouting Heritage Merit Badge Request
National Scouting Museum
c/o Philmont Scout Ranch
17 Deer Run Road
Cimarron, NM 87714
philmont.museums@scouting.org
COLLECTIONS
For more informa-
tion on cataloging,
evaluating, and
displaying your
collection, see the
Collections merit
badge pamphlet.
Eagle Scout medals from the National
Scouting Museum (left to right): the first
badge, awarded to Arthur Eldred in 1912;
the first adult Eagle Scout, awarded to
Sidney K. Clapp in 1912; medal awarded
in 2021 to Katie Hunter, representing the
Inaugural Class of Female Eagle Scouts.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 57
.Preserving Scouting Heritage
Other Scouting Museums
There’s only one National Scouting Museum, but many local
councils and other groups have created Scouting museums.
Some fit into small rooms in council service centers; others
house hundreds of thousands of items.
Collecting Scouting Memories
Requirements 5 and 8 ask you to interview several people who
were involved in Scouting in the past. Talking with these people
can open a window into Scouting heritage in ways an old Scout
handbook or a patch collection never could.
The Smart Family Foundation Scouting Heritage Gallery at the
National Scouting Museum uses the aims and methods of
Scouting to organize and help tell the story of Scouting.
Your Scout leaders can probably tell you if there is a Scouting historian
or memorabilia collector in your council or a museum near you.
Whether you decide to visit with a collector or see an exhibit, be sure
you have your parent or guardian’s permission, counselor’s approval,
and follow Youth Protection guidelines.
A new, ever-growing official website, The Scouting Memories Project at
scoutingmemories.org, is an interactive archive of Scouting. The
collection contains indexes of at least 2,323 councils (current and past),
3,550 camps, and 1,002 Order of the Arrow lodges. It’s a great place to
start (or continue) your Scouting heritage journey.


58 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Preserving Scouting Heritage.
Preparing for Interviews
For your interviews to be effective, you need to be prepared.
Before you meet with a subject, develop a list of questions that
you want to ask. Newspaper reporters learn to ask questions in
six categories—who, what, when, where, why, and how—and
it’s a good idea to cover all of those areas.
Start your list with basic factual questions: What troop were
you in? When did you join? Where did it meet? What rank did
you achieve? Then, move on to questions like these:
• Why did you join Scouting?
• What is your favorite memory of your time in Scouting?
• What was your best camping trip? Your worst?
• Did you ever go to a jamboree or on a high-adventure trip?
Please describe it.
• Did you participate in any major service projects in Scouting?
Tell me about them.
• What was the hardest thing you ever did in Scouting?
• Tell me about your Scoutmaster (or other Scout leader).
• What fun traditions did your troop have or places you liked
to go every year?
• What lessons did you learn in Scouting that are still
important to you?
• How has Scouting changed since you were a Scout?
• What else about Scouting would you like to tell me about?
Based on your knowledge of Scouting history, you will
be able to come up with more specific questions. For example,
if you are going to interview someone who was a Scout during
World War II, ask him if he participated in projects to support
the war effort, as described earlier in this pamphlet.
Be sure to write questions that are open-ended and that
will encourage your subject to tell stories. Avoid questions
(like “Did you enjoy Scouting?”) that don’t yield any
interesting information and leave you with only a yes, no,
or one-word answers.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 59
.Preserving Scouting Heritage
Holding a Successful Interview
When you are ready, make appoint-
ments for your interviews and tell
each person what you want to talk
about. Invite them to bring memen-
tos they might like to show you, like
a Scout handbook they used.
If possible, record the interview.
That way, you can focus more on
the conversation and less on taking
notes. Be sure your recording device
has fresh batteries, and test it at the
beginning of the interview to make
sure it’s working properly.
Once you begin the interview, allow your subject plenty
of time to think about responses to your questions. Sometimes
simply being quiet and attentive is the best thing you can do.
After the Interview
Write down at least one point that you think is important and
that you want to remember. Your notes will come in handy in
your discussion with your counselor about requirement 8.
Say Thank You With a
Handwritten Note
Send a handwritten thank-you note
in the mail to each person
you have interviewed,
thanking them for taking the
time to meet with you and
for sharing their memories.
This takes more effort than an
email, but it shows more
respect. Mail your note no
more than one week after the
interview. Adults and elders
will be impressed with your
good manners.


The artwork of famed Artist Norman Rockwell is
celebrated in several displays at the National
Scouting Museum, including this model of the 1959
painting “Tomorrow’s Leader.” Rockwell idealized the
patrol leader in his painting by portraying the
American Scout as a strong character, physically fit,
and a leader of vision and determination.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 61
.Reliving Scouting History
Reliving
Scouting History
Perhaps you have visited a museum where interpreters
pretended to be famous historical figures like George
Washington or Thomas Jefferson. Perhaps you have
watched Civil War reenactors relive the battle of
Gettysburg or Chickamauga.
Maybe you have completed a backcountry trek
at Philmont and encountered staff members portraying
homesteaders, mountain men, or Waite Phillips and his
family. If so, you have caught a glimpse of the power
of living history. When you move from reading about
history to reliving it, you begin to truly understand how
people lived long ago.
A fun way to relive Scouting history is to plan
a Brownsea Island weekend, where you and your
fellow Scouts camp, cook, and play games like the first
Scouts did 100 years ago. In addition to this merit badge
pamphlet, good sources of information are reprints
of Scouting for Boys and the 1911 Handbook for Boys,
both of which you can find online at www.scoutshop.org.


62 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Reliving Scouting History.
Here is a suggested daily schedule for your Brownsea Island weekend
—straight out of Scouting for Boys:
7 a.m. Turn out, air bed, wash, etc.
8 a.m. Flag raising; prayers.
8:15 a.m. Breakfast.
10 a.m. Inspection.
10:15 a.m.–noon. Scouting activities.
1 p.m. Dinner.
1:30–2:30 p.m. Quiet hour.
2:30–5 p.m. Wide games.
5 p.m. Tea and biscuits.
5:30–8 p.m. Recreation and
camp games.
8 p.m. Cocoa.
8:30–9:30 p.m. Campfire.
10 p.m. Lights out.
Old Scouting books suggest some techniques that are no longer
acceptable, such as digging trenches around tents to prevent flooding.
First aid and lifesaving techniques have also changed significantly in
the past hundred years. When in doubt, talk with your Scout leader
before trying questionable techniques.
Why no “supper” in this schedule? The British
working class traditionally had “tea” (meaning their
evening meal) at about 5 p.m., after workers’ shifts
ended in the factories, mines, and rail yards. People ate
early and went to bed early because they had to be up
before dawn. They ate “dinner,” the main meal of the
day, around 1 p.m., as in the Brownsea Island example.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 63
.Reliving Scouting History
Camping Equipment
Early Scouts didn’t have the high-tech gear we enjoy today.
They made do with surplus military equipment and items found
around their homes. Here are some suggestions for your
Brownsea Island weekend:
• Borrow canvas wall tents from your local Scout camp or
make lean-tos using tarps and cord.
• Instead of using a sleeping bag, make a bedroll out of an
old blanket.
• Instead of using an air mattress, make a soft camp bed out
of leaves.
• Use large tin cans as cooking pots.
• Leave your mess kit at home and make do with a metal
plate, cup, and utensils.


64 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Reliving Scouting History.
Cooking
Early Scouts cooked over open fires. While that’s not always
possible today due to fire restrictions, the Leave No Trace Seven
Principles, or the Outdoor Code, you can still cook like early
Scouts did. Limit yourself to fresh foods and things you can
make from scratch—no ready-to-eat or just-add-water meals. As
Baden-Powell said in Scouting for Boys, “Every Scout must, of
course, know how to cook his own meat and vegetables and to
make bread for himself without regular cooking utensils.”
Here are some things early Scouts ate on campouts:
kabobs, beef stew, potatoes roasted in hot coals, canned salmon
on toast, oatmeal, twist bread (strips of bread dough wrapped
around a stick and cooked over the fire), bacon and eggs.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 65
.Reliving Scouting History
Games and Activities
Like today’s Scouts, Scouts of the past enjoyed a wide variety
of games and activities. Some of these tested Scout skills,
while others were purely for fun. The highlight of your
Brownsea Island weekend could be a series of games like
those Baden-Powell taught the first Scouts back in 1907.
Kim’s Game
Equipment: 20 or 30 small objects (pencils,
patches, photos, coins, etc.), a large sheet,
and a pencil and paper for each player
Place the objects on the ground and
cover them with the sheet. Have the players
gather in a circle. Remove the sheet for
60 seconds to let the players study the
assortment of objects. Replace the sheet,
and ask the players to write down all the
objects they saw. The player who remembers
the most objects wins.
Variation: Use items that have a distinctive
scent, like cinnamon or cedar. Put the items
in paper bags and have players smell them
and guess what they are.


66 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Reliving Scouting History.
Old Spotty-Face
Equipment: A large piece of poster board
divided into 12 squares, smaller versions
of the large board (one per player), six or
eight black paper circles about ½ inch in
diameter, pins or masking tape, and a pencil
for each player
Give the players the small poster boards
and pencils and send them a few hundred
yards away. Affix the paper circles to the
large poster board, one per square, to form a
pattern. Hold the board up so the players can
see it. Have them walk toward you until they
can make out the pattern and reproduce it
on their boards. The player who gets the
pattern correct at the greatest distance wins.


SCOUTING HERITAGE 67
.Reliving Scouting History
Fugitives
Equipment: A large, numbered disk of cardboard for each
player, safety pins, peanuts, or sunflower seeds
Pin a numbered cardboard disk on each player’s back. One
player is the fugitive, while the others act as hunters. Give the
fugitive 10 minutes to leave the area and hide. The fugitive
must leave a trail by dropping peanuts or sunflower seeds along
the way. The hunters must then track the fugitive down. The
first hunter to get close enough to see the fugitive’s number
wins. However, if the fugitive is able to see a hunter’s number
first, that hunter is out of the game.


68 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Reliving Scouting History.
Make a Rag Ball
Equipment: Rags, twine or string, and peach baskets or
bushel baskets
Cut rags into strips, roll the strips into a ball, and secure
tightly with twine or string. Play games such as dodgeball,
basketball (using a peach basket tied to a tree as a makeshift
hoop), bucketball (like basketball except the ball must stay in
the bushel-basket “bucket” to count as a score), or some other
familiar game that requires a ball.
A giant ball


SCOUTING HERITAGE 69
.Reliving Scouting History
Compass Points
Equipment: Eight hiking staffs, arranged on the ground
so they radiate from the center and point in the eight
major compass directions: north, northeast, east,
southeast, south, southwest, west, and northwest
One Scout stands at the end of each staff. Call out
two compass headings—southeast and north, for example.
The Scouts standing at those headings immediately
exchange places, going around the outside of the circle.
If a Scout moves without being called—or is called but
moves to the wrong place—he loses a point. After losing
three points, a player is out of the game.
Variation: To make the game harder,
use 16 staffs, adding directions like
north-northeast or west-southwest, or
call out the degrees instead of the names
—90 degrees instead of east, for example.
Tracking
Equipment: Props for scenarios, as
described below
Mark off a tracking area about
15 yards square in snow, sand, or damp
ground. Have one patrol create a scenario by making footprints
and other marks. Then, have a second patrol try to figure out
what happened. Possible scenarios:
• A Scout walked along with a bucket of water and put
it down when he stopped to rest.
• A Scout walked backward.
• A person walked through with a cane and then was
joined by someone else.
• A Scout carrying a box stopped to rest and sat on it.


70 SCOUTING HERITAGE
Scouting Heritage Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Heritage, Collections,
Communication, Genealogy, and
Journalism merit badge pamphlets;
Baden-Powell: The Two Lives of a Hero;
The Book of Camp-Lore and Woodcraft;
Boy Scouts of America: A Centennial
History Book; Cub Scouting: The First
75 Years of Doing Our Best; Handbook
for Boys (1911); Norman Rockwell’s
Boy Scouts of America
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Anderson, H. Allen. The Chief:
Ernest Thompson Seton and
the Changing West. Texas A&M
University Press, 1986.
Baden-Powell, Robert. Scouting for
Boys (1908). Dover, 2007.
Beard, Daniel Carter. The Book of
Camp-Lore and Woodcraft (1882).
David R. Godine, 2008.
Birkby, Robert. Boy Scouts of America
Scout Stuff. DK Adult, 2011.
Burnham, Fredrick R. Scouting on Two
Continents (1926). Independently
published, 2019.
Csatari, Joseph. Norman Rockwell’s
Boy Scouts of America.
DK Publishing, 2009.
Eastman, Charles A. Indian Boyhood
(1902). Dover, 1971.
___________. Indian Scout Talks (1914).
Benediction Classics, 2012.
Hillcourt, William (with Olave, Lady
Baden-Powell). Baden-Powell: The
Two Lives of a Hero (1965). The
“Green Bar Bill” Hillcourt
Foundation, 2023.
Kemper, Steve. A Splendid Savage: The
Restless Life of Frederick Russell
Burnham. W. W. Norton &
Company, 2017.
Moynihan, Paul. The Official History
of Scouts. Hamlyn, 2006.
Murray, William D. The History of
the Boy Scouts of America (1935).
Kessinger, 2010.
Petterchak, Janice A. Lone Scout:
W. D. Boyce and American Boy
Scouting. Legacy Press, 2003.
Scouting Heritage Resources


SCOUTING HERITAGE 71
.Scouting Heritage Resources
Rowan, Edward L. To Do My Best: James
E. West and the History of
the Boy Scouts of America.
PublishingWorks, 2005.
Seton, Ernest Thompson. Woodcraft and
Indian Lore (1912). Dover, 2014.
Wallis, Michael. Beyond the Hills: The
Journey of Waite Phillips. Oklahoma
Heritage Association, 1995.
West, James E.; Lamb, Peter O.; Baden-
Powell, Robert (Artist). He-Who-Sees-In-
The-Dark: The Boy’s Story of Frederick
Burnham, The American Scout. Brewer,
Warren and Putnam, 1932.
West, James E., and others. Handbook for
Boys (1911). Dover, 2005.
Wills, Chuck. Boy Scouts of America:
A Centennial History. DK Adult, 2013.
Zimmer, Stephen, and Larry Walker.
Philmont: A Brief History of the
New Mexico Scout Ranch.
Sunstone, 2000.
Organizations and Websites
International Scouting
Collectors Association
www.scouttrader.org
National Scouting Museum
www.bsamuseum.org
www.facebook.com/
nationalscoutingmuseumbsa
www.youtube.com/user/
NatlScoutingMuseum
Philmont.museums@scouting.org
The Pine Tree Web
www.pinetreeweb.com
Periodicals
Scout Life magazine
www.scoutlife.org
Scouting magazine
www.scoutingmagazine.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Eagle Scout
and Scouter Steve Bowen, D.V.M., Seeley
Lake, Montana, for his role in bringing this
merit badge and pamphlet to fruition.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—page 7
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, George
Grantham Bain collection, courtesy—
page 10 (Ernest Thompson Seton)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—44 (canoers)
Tom Copeland—52 and 64
Al Drago—51 (jamboree activity)
Daniel Giles—65–67 (all), 68 (except giant
ball), and 69 (compass points game)
The “Green Bar Bill” Hillcourt Foundation,
courtesy—7
National Scouting Museum, courtesy—56,
57, and 58
Roy Jansen—38 (police) and 41 (archery)
Brian Payne—39 (Venturers), 47, 68 (giant
ball), and 69 (tracking game)
Randy Piland—32 (Sea Scout), 37 (Sea
Scouts saluting), and 50


72 SCOUTING HERITAGE
With bugles in hand, these Cub Scouts
participated in a 1939 Memorial Day
commemoration.
As part of their citizenship training,
Scouts have long encouraged others
to vote even though they were too
young to vote themselves. This Scout
bugler in Chicago helps promote the
1928 general election.