PUBLIC
HEALTH


BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
PUBLIC HEALTH
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
35935
ISBN 978-0-8395-0120-6
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Public-Health or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


PUBLIC HEALTH 3


4 PUBLIC HEALTH


PUBLIC HEALTH 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Diseases . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Food Safety and Sanitation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Sanitation in the Community and at Camp. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Pollution and Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Tobacco, Alcohol, and Drugs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Careers in Public Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78





PUBLIC HEALTH 7
.Introduction
Introduction
The field of public health deals with maintaining and monitor-
ing the health of communities, and with the detection, cure,
and prevention of health risks and diseases. Although public
health is generally seen as a community-oriented service, it
actually starts with the individual. From a single individual
to the family unit to the smallest isolated rural town to the
worldwide global community, one person can influence the
health of many.
As you work on the Public Health merit badge, remember that
public health begins with the individual—with you—and from
there grows out into the community, and into the whole world.
What you learn in earning this merit badge can be of as much
value to you and your own personal health as it is to your
entire community.
The public health team is made up of all sorts
of members working at all levels of health care.
For example, a health care provider might treat a
patient for fever, vomiting, and diarrhea that was
caused by a bacteria (E coli, Campylobacter, or
salmonellosis). The provider reports the case to the
local health department. From there, local or state
public health officials might be called to investigate
multiple reports of food poisoning in the area,
locate the source of the infection, and initiate
prevention and containment programs to help
prevent others from becoming ill.


8 PUBLIC HEALTH
Introduction.
Public Health Goals
The four main goals of public health are
• To help prevent disease and injury
• To teach people how to be healthy
• To provide basic health services to certain communities
• To help protect people from environmental hazards such
as pollution
As you can see, the goals of public
health cover many different types of
health issues. Because of this, many
types of public health specialists with
different responsibilities work together
to try to meet these goals.
Local health inspectors make sure
that health codes and regulations are
being followed. They may drop by
restaurants to ensure that foods are
stored at the right temperature, dishes
are washed properly, and the people
handling food are following food-safety
rules. Other kinds of inspectors will
check a city’s drinking water for dan-
gerous levels of contaminants such as
lead and arsenic or bacteria.
Public health officials work to prevent disease by
attacking the sources of diseases. When efforts to
prevent a disease fail, health workers try to contain
the source of a disease or an outbreak of illness.
Health officers enforce laws that help
ensure the public’s well-being.


PUBLIC HEALTH 9
.Introduction
Many public health scientists
investigate and research the
unidentified causes of illnesses.
These are the detectives of the
public health world, and they are
called epidemiologists. For example,
after an outbreak of birth defects
in babies worldwide, the Zika
virus spread by mosquitoes
was identified. When there is an
outbreak of food poisoning, public
health scientists try to track down
the source, such as a supply of
hamburger meat infected with the
bacterium Escherichia coli.
Doctors and nurses are often
public health workers, especially
those who work at community
clinics or travel to serve remote
communities. Many people live far
away from hospitals and doctors’
offices. The traveling medical units
of public health agencies help these people by providing
the medicines and checkups they need.
The federal and state governments employ
many kinds of public health workers, like this
lab technician.
An epidemic is an outbreak, or sudden increase,
of a disease that spreads quickly and widely,
infecting many people at the same time. You
probably have heard of or even experienced a flu
epidemic. Epidemiology is the medical science that
studies the occurrence and spread of diseases
in places like a school or summer camp, and on a
larger scale in cities, counties, states, nations, and
even worldwide.


10 PUBLIC HEALTH
Introduction.
Some members of the public health community are educa-
tors. They may visit individual families, schools, and workplaces
to teach people about the hazards they might encounter at
home, in the community, or at work. For instance, they may
visit factories to teach people how to protect themselves from
hearing loss or other injuries. The educators may also instruct
workers on the proper method of wearing the protective gear
their employer provides.
National Health Services
In the United States, the Department of Health and Human
Services (HHS) oversees many of the efforts to protect public
health. The head of the department—the secretary of Health
and Human Services—is appointed by the president of the
United States.
The HHS is made up of many large agencies that
specialize in various areas of public health. For example, the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention tracks data and
trends related to diseases, and works to prevent the spread of
disease. Together with state, county, and city health depart-
ments, the CDC provides immunizations, monitors the safety
of drinking water, and investigates outbreaks of disease. Inside
the CDC are many organizations that specialize in different
areas of public health, such as birth defects, workplace safety,
and infectious diseases.
The CDC’s website, www.cdc.gov, is full of
information about hundreds of issues, including
travelers’ health, nutrition, and fighting the flu.
Epidemiologists and biostatisticians keep records
about the occurrence of diseases, injuries, and
other threats to public health, often helping to
develop new laws and regulations that help control
public health risks. They provide reports that help
communities predict such things as when to spray
for mosquitoes or offer an immunization to help
prevent an outbreak of disease.


PUBLIC HEALTH 11
.Introduction
The Food and Drug Administration ensures that
pharmaceuticals (drugs), cosmetics, and foods are safe for our
use and consumption. The FDA tests drugs before they are put
on the market, and approves and licenses them for human
consumption and for sale. The FDA issues consumer alerts that
warn people about things that might pose a risk to someone,
such as tobacco products or some food additives, or maybe
even trace amounts of peanut oil in a plain brownie mix. An
alert like this could save the life of someone who is highly
allergic to peanuts. The FDA also can prohibit the sale of a
food or drug that it decides is too dangerous.
Another federal agency involved in public health is the
National Institutes of Health, which conducts research in
its own laboratories. It also helps other organizations, such
as universities, hospitals, and medical schools, discover ways
to prevent and cure illnesses all over the world. One way the
NIH supports research is by maintaining the National Library
of Medicine. Now available online, this is the largest research
library of health sciences in the world. This library is an
important source of information for scientists, health care
providers, epidemiologists, and biostatisticians.
Other federal agencies also assist in public health efforts.
For example, the Environmental Protection Agency investi-
gates and regulates pollution. It might enforce regulations that
limit the amount of chemicals a factory can discharge into a
river or the air.
Dentists and veterinarians are also part of the
public health realm. Oral health is vital to an
individual’s well-being. Rabies and other diseases
that can affect wild and domesticated animals are
also a public health concern.


12 PUBLIC HEALTH
Introduction.
State, City, and Local Health Services
Local health agencies provide many public health services,
some required by federal or state law. They provide drug
rehabilitation programs and educate citizens about violence
and injury prevention. Many local health departments also
sponsor health clinics. Well-baby clinics promote good health in
infants, while immunization or screening clinics stress disease
The Public Health Service Commissioned Corps is
another significant branch of the HHS. According to
its website (see the resources section), this unique
agency has programs that
• Provide health care and related services to
medically underserved populations.
• Prevent and control disease, and identify and
help correct health hazards in the environment.
• Promote healthy lifestyles.
• Ensure the safety and effectiveness of drugs and
medical devices, and the safety of food, cosmetics,
and electronic products.
• Conduct and support biomedical, behavioral,
and health services research, and assist in the
distribution of the research results to health-care
professionals and the public.
• Work with other countries and international
agencies on addressing global health problems
and developing solutions.
A uniformed service of the United States that
is led by the U.S. Surgeon General, the PHS
Commissioned Corps is a specialized career system
“designed to attract, develop, and retain health
professionals who may be assigned to federal,
state, or local agencies or international organizations
to accomplish its mission.” This agency furnishes
health expertise “in time of war or other national
or international emergencies.”


PUBLIC HEALTH 13
.Introduction
prevention. Other clinics may promote dental health or general
health. Such agencies may also provide rabies control programs.
They keep vital statistics about births, deaths, and marriages
and the incidence of disease in a community.
Every local health department has an office that handles
records of reportable diseases. A reportable disease—such as
gonorrhea, Lyme disease, or influenza—is one that health
officials and doctors are required to report to the local or state
health department. When doctors report these cases, the identity
of the infected person remains confidential. The local health
department summarizes the number of cases and reports these
findings to the state health department, which in turn notifies
the federal government at the CDC.
Morbidity is
the incidence
of disease in
a population.
Mortality is the
rate of deaths
in a population.
Both usually are
expressed as
the number of
incidents per
1,000 citizens
during a year.
Zoonotic diseases—diseases that affect both humans
and animals—such as rabies, must be reported by
veterinarians to local or state health departments.
Health clinics run by local physicians, dentists, and nurses, and
public health rabies clinics run by veterinarians, usually are open
to everybody.


14 PUBLIC HEALTH
Introduction.
When a disaster such as a flood or earthquake strikes,
public health departments help the community in many ways.
If a hospital is flooded, public health workers may help move
patients from that hospital to a nearby facility. Public health
departments may also issue press releases to the media to
help citizens know when it is safe to return home. Information
may include tips about avoiding floodwater, which may carry
disease, or staying clear of fallen power lines, which can be
deadly. Public health workers might hand out clean drinking
water or set up field medical units to help injured people.
A division of environmental health within the local
department of health, or a department of public
works, typically supervises a city’s water and sani-
tation services. Services include delivering clean,
potable (drinkable) water to homes; processing
sewage and other household wastes; and disposing
of solid wastes. This department might help to
control pests that can carry diseases or endanger
public health. Department employees might also
inspect public swimming pools, local lakes, and
waterfronts to ensure that the water is safe
for swimming.


PUBLIC HEALTH 15
.Introduction
Private Health Services
Some agencies that promote public health are supported by
private funds and donations. Private agencies typically focus on
a single problem area, help people affected by the problem, and
sponsor research that might solve the problem. The National
Society for the Prevention of Blindness is an example.
Public and private agencies may concentrate on the same
problem and work together to seek solutions. For example,
understanding the processes that start and promote cancer
is important to both the National Cancer Institute (a federal
agency) and the American Cancer Society (a private organi-
zation). Both agencies sponsor cancer research, seeking better
methods for detecting and treating cancer.
Protecting the public health is everyone’s responsibility.
Each one of us can help ensure everyone else’s health and safety
by not polluting the air, water, or environment. Individuals also
can help by maintaining healthy lifestyles. Communities can
help by keeping streets and municipal properties clean and
free of litter and by providing a pure water supply and sanitary
waste disposal systems.


Adult specimen of a pork tapeworm, taken from the intestine of a human


PUBLIC HEALTH 17
.Diseases
Diseases
One of the responsibilities of public health professionals is to
become familiar with diseases, their causes, and their cures to
help protect the public. But individuals also can help maintain
public health, and their own health, by learning about diseases.
Causes of Disease
Many diseases are caused by bacteria, viruses, parasitic
worms, protozoa, fungi, and other pathogens, or disease-
causing organisms that invade the body. Some examples of
these infectious diseases are tetanus (bacterial), influenza and
coronavirus (viral), athlete’s foot (fungal), and hookworm
(parasitic).
Other diseases are caused by the environment. For example,
overexposure to the mineral lead can cause mental impairment
and death. Benzene, a chemical found in tobacco smoke, vehicle
exhaust, detergents, and other sources, can cause leukemia.
Diseases that are passed through the genes, from parents to
offspring, are known as hereditary diseases. Examples include
sickle-cell anemia and hemophilia.
Still other diseases may be caused by poor lifestyle choices.
For example, cardiovascular, or heart, disease is the leading
cause of death in the United States. Encouraging healthy
dietary habits and regular physical activity can markedly
reduce the numbers of deaths from heart attacks each year.
We call diseases
communicable
if they can be
spread from one
person to another.
Diseases that
cannot be spread
this way—such as
heart disease and
diabetes—are
noncommuni-
cable. We call
diseases
zoonotic if
they can be
transmitted
between humans
and animals.
Factors such as the natural spread and transmission
of diseases, overcrowding in many underdeveloped
countries, the ease of world travel, and the potential
spreading of previously rare or unknown diseases
through the use of infectious agents in warfare all
make the responsibilities of today’s public health
officials more challenging.


18 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Prevention, Treatments, and Cures
Prevention is the best way to control disease. But after a
person has become sick, the goal of health professionals
is treatment.
Many types of treatment have been developed for battling
infections. Medicines called antibiotics cure some diseases by
killing or inhibiting bacteria, and antiviral medications treat
infections caused by a virus.
However, some bacteria and viruses have become resistant
to the drugs usually used for treatment. The diseases caused
by such drug-resistant pathogens are becoming increasingly
difficult to cure. Tuberculosis was almost eradicated, but new
strains of it are causing worldwide epidemics.
Many diseases, such as AIDS and arthritis, have no
medicinal cure. However, medicines and therapies can offer
a great deal of help with these diseases. A person with emphy-
sema, for instance, often benefits from breathing exercises
and drugs that help dilate (open up) air passages. Physical
therapy and drugs that help reduce inflammation in the body
(anti-inflammatory medicines) can help people with arthritis.
Antibodies and Immunizations
In most cases, when the body is infected with a disease,
it responds naturally (with help from its immune system)
by making special substances called antibodies that fight the
pathogen causing the disease. Often, a person’s body can cure
itself of a disease, such as a cold or the flu, because antibodies
have been hard at work.
Antibodies play an important role in immunization (also
known as inoculation or vaccination). Some vaccines are made
of live viruses that are greatly weakened in a laboratory. If a
person comes in contact with a virus for which they received a
vaccine, the body responds by fighting off the infection with its
own antibodies. Other vaccines are made from killed bacteria
or related organisms that cause a similar but milder disease.
This triggers the body’s immune system to respond as if the
disease was present and produce antibodies. Vaccinations can
help the body build resistance to some diseases.
Immunizations,
or vaccines, offer
protection against
many infectious
diseases.


PUBLIC HEALTH 19
.Diseases
The idea of vaccination is not new. People have long
noticed that individuals who survive a certain disease rarely
get the disease a second time. Edward Jenner (1749–1823),
an English physician, created the first modern immunization
program. Dr. Jenner ground up scabs from people infected
with cowpox, which affected people who work with cattle, and
poked this material under the skin of others who did not have
active cases of cowpox. The people he treated got mild cases
of cowpox and became immune to the closely related small-
pox virus, a deadly disease at the time. Before immunizations
became available, one-third to one-half of all smallpox victims
died. The survivors usually were badly scarred. Today, through
public health–sponsored international immunization programs,
smallpox has been eradicated all over the world.
Immunization is one of the best ways to protect
health and help us avoid infectious diseases.
Regular checkups help ensure you stay on track with the recommended
vaccine schedule.


20 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
The immune system makes antibodies for each particular
disease that it meets. Therefore, a different vaccine is needed
for each disease. Immunization is available today against
many diseases found in the United States, including diphtheria,
pertussis (whooping cough), tetanus, polio, mumps, red
measles (rubeola), German measles (rubella), certain strains
of influenza, hepatitis A and B, and chicken pox. Immunizations
also are available for many other diseases that are uncommon
in the United States but common in other parts of the world,
such as yellow fever and typhoid fever. Americans typically
receive these immunizations when they travel out of the country
or join the armed forces.
Immunization is suggested for very young children, with
periodic booster injections as recommended. Antibodies are
long-lasting, but the protection they give may decrease with
time. A second exposure to a pathogen will increase the level of
antibodies a person’s body will produce. So a second injection,
or booster shot, often is given to help strengthen immunity.
Adults need immunizations, too. For example,
tetanus boosters need to be given every 10 years.
Some vaccines are swallowed; others are injected.


PUBLIC HEALTH 21
.Diseases
This schedule includes recommendations in effect as of Jan. 1, 2014. Vaccination providers should consult the relevant Advisory Committee of Immunization Practices
(ACIP) statement for detailed recommendations, available online at www.cdc.gov/vaccines/hcp/acip-recs/index.html. This schedule is approved by the Advisory Committee
on Immunization Practices, the American Academy of Pediatrics, the American Academy of Family Physicians, and the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
Recommended Immunization Schedule
for Persons Through Age 18


22 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Early Detection
After a person has been exposed to an infectious agent such
as a bacteria, virus, parasite, or fungus, some time may pass
before symptoms appear. During this incubation period, the
infectious agent often multiplies and spreads in the body. The
incubation period for the common cold is about a week. Some
diseases, however, have long incubation periods, sometimes
called a long latent period. Examples of these diseases include
tuberculosis, Bovine Spongiform Encephalopathy (Mad Cow),
and HIV/AIDS.
Many of the people who are infected with tuberculosis
are not aware of their infection. Tuberculosis saps a person’s
strength and vitality. Sometimes the disease attacks the organs.
It is spread by lung discharges, like coughs. AIDS is a disease
that is spread through various bodily fluids, such as blood or
semen. People who do not know that they have the virus that
causes AIDS can spread the deadly disease for years before
they show symptoms themselves.
Clearly, it is important to detect diseases as soon as
possible after they develop. Public health providers can be a
great help in the early detection of diseases through testing
and routine screening as well as educating the public
about diseases.
Screening Tests
Public health workers often conduct screening tests to discover
diseases and infections among large groups of people. Screening
tests usually are given in convenient, public locations such
as schools, shopping centers, neighborhood health centers, or
specially equipped trailers that can easily be moved and set up.
Health screening tests vary. Skin tests are used to detect
allergies or tuberculosis. The test for tuberculosis is required
for all commercial food preparers and handlers, for health care
workers, and for those in many other service professions. Chest
Early detection and treatment of disease greatly
increase the chances of a disease being cured
or its negative effects being slowed, and greatly
decrease the chance that the disease is passed on
to other people.


PUBLIC HEALTH 23
.Diseases
radiographs (X-rays) are used to screen for cancer, tuberculosis,
and other lung diseases. Blood tests can detect AIDS, other
sexually transmitted diseases, hepatitis, thyroid problems,
and diabetes.
Screening tests are not meant to make a final diagnosis
or to identify a disease. People who have positive results
on screening tests should have more precise tests done. A
personal health care professional should be consulted after
any positive screening test.
X-rays are used to diagnose a variety of diseases and conditions. An X-ray machine’s
invisible electromagnetic beams produce images of tissues, bones, and organs for
analysis on special film or digitally on a computer.


24 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Common Diseases
Hundreds of diseases around the world can infect humans.
While some of these diseases might be considered “exotic” or
“foreign” to the rest of the world, they could be classified as
“common” diseases to the affected area and its population.
Many factors help determine the spread or containment of
these diseases. For instance, some diseases
• Are common and deadly in one area and not another, such
as malaria and cholera
• May have been common in some parts of the world and
then may start appearing in another part, such as West Nile
virus, Zika, and the Ebola virus
• Were once common but are now controlled or wiped out,
such as smallpox
• May have a limited effect because of natural barriers
(forests, jungles, mountain ranges) or climate factors
(as with tropical rain forest diseases)
• Are found in specific genetic populations (for example,
hemophilia) or because of cultural practices (hepatitis B is
one example)
A vector is any animal or insect that can transmit a disease
to a human. Flies, mosquitoes, ticks, and rats are common
vectors. Covering trash, disposing of pet feces, removing
standing water, and clearing debris and overgrown plants
from your property will help keep vectors away.
In the interest of public health, communities
work together to keep vector-borne diseases
at a minimum. Regular garbage pickup,
mosquito surveillance
and treatment, and
enforcement of health
codes are just some
of the ways cities help
control vectors.
Individuals can help prevent disease by making their
living spaces inhospitable to vectors such as rats.


PUBLIC HEALTH 25
.Diseases
Some diseases are easily described; others do not fall into
neat categories. For example, a virus, a bacterium, or even
another source can bring on meningitis. Some diseases that
generally are known as sexually transmitted diseases can be
spread in other ways as well. Vectors such as mosquitoes and
ticks spread many diseases. Other diseases are the result of
environmental sources, such as secondhand smoke.
All of us should learn about common diseases in our area
and what we can do to help prevent them; this is where public
health starts. Following are some diseases that are common
concerns for public health in the United States.
Coronavirus and Influenza (the Flu)
Coronavirus and influenza are caused by
viruses. They affect respiration (breathing).
Symptoms include fever, muscle aches, sore
throat, and a dry cough. Some people also
experience nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea.
Specific viral respiratory diseases
like the flu and coronavirus are extremely
contagious and can spread around the world
(called a pandemic). A sneeze or cough can
carry virus-infected droplets through the
air up to 3 feet, where they might fall on
another person or an object people share.
People with weakened immune systems,
such as the elderly, can contact diseases at a
substantially higher rate than more healthy
populations. However, all age groups
can become infected. To avoid infection,
everyone must cover their mouths when
coughing or sneezing and wear masks when
appropriate. We must frequently wash our
hands and avoid contact with others. All of
these practices can greatly reduce the spread
of viral respiratory disease infections.
People with
viral respiratory
infections are
contagious one day
before and up to two
weeks after they
show symptoms.
Everyone over the age of 6 months should get a flu vaccine each year,
especially those with weakened immune systems and the elderly. Each
year, many Americans die from the flu and related complications like
pneumonia. Vaccinations have been developed, but because the flu virus
has many different strains, the vaccine may not keep a person from
getting some form of the flu. Antiviral medicines may help lessen the
severity of the flu and other viral respiratory infections.
Whenever handling food and after
going to the bathroom, hand
washing with soap and water will
help keep you—and others—healthy.


26 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Hepatitis
Hepatitis is a virus that attacks the liver. There are several
types of hepatitis but the major types are type A, type B, and
type C. In many cases of hepatitis, a person will not have any
symptoms of the disease. When symptoms do appear, they can
be similar to those of the flu. Jaundice may also occur.
Type A hepatitis is spread through contaminated fecal
matter. When people do not wash their hands well after using
the bathroom and then handle food, they can pass on hepatitis
to unsuspecting diners. Water can be infected by animal or
human fecal matter, too. There usually is no long-term infection
for hepatitis A, but types B and C can lead to serious liver
disease and liver cancer.
Hepatitis B and C are spread through infected bodily
fluids such as saliva, semen, and blood. An estimated 1.2
million Americans have hepatitis B, and as many as 4 mil-
lion Americans have been infected with hepatitis C. Most of
these people do not know they have hepatitis. Over the last
few years great advances have been made in treating hepatitis
C. The CDC estimates that 1 in 4 infected with
hepatitis C may be able to be cured with proper
treatment. There is still no cure for hepatitis B,
but a vaccine to prevent this type is available
for all age groups.
All forms of hepatitis can be prevented by
practicing good sanitation and personal hygiene,
treating water that is not potable (drinkable),
sterilizing medical supplies and equipment, and
isolating people who have hepatitis A. To pre-
vent the spread of hepatitis, do not share razors,
toothbrushes, or any other items that could
have tiny, even invisible amounts of blood on
them. Also, when visiting countries where type
E hepatitis has been found, drink only water
that has been boiled.
Jaundice is the yellowing of skin and eyes.
It signals that the liver is not functioning properly.
The tools of tattoo artists can
transmit hepatitis.


PUBLIC HEALTH 27
.Diseases
Meningitis
Meningitis is an infection that causes inflammation of the
meninges, the tissue surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
It can be caused by many different viruses, bacteria, and
even fungi.
The signs of meningitis usually include headache, high
fever, and a stiff neck. There may also be sensitivity to light,
vomiting, confusion or drowsiness, and a rash. The symptoms
in babies include fever, refusal to eat, and difficulty in
being awakened.
Viral meningitis is serious but not usually fatal. Bacterial
meningitis, however, can cause brain damage, hearing loss,
and death within just a few hours. That is why it is important
to go to the doctor or hospital immediately if you think you
have meningitis. Bacterial meningitis is treated with antibiotics.
Viral meningitis may be treated with antiviral drugs or left
to resolve itself. Fungal meningitis can be treated with an
antifungal medicine.
Many types of meningitis are spread by respiratory and
throat secretions, such as mucus and saliva. A cough can
spread the bacteria or virus into the air or onto things like
telephones. Wash your hands often to help avoid transferring
the bacteria and viruses to yourself.
Sometimes, small epidemics of meningitis occur
among people living in close quarters—places
like college dorms, day-care centers, and
military barracks.
A procedure called a spinal tap, during which a
doctor takes a sample of fluid from near the spine,
lets the doctor know what kind of meningitis, if
any, a person has.


28 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Emphysema
Emphysema is a lung condition that makes it hard for a person
to get enough oxygen. The small air sacs, or alveoli, in the
lungs lose their elasticity and become much less efficient at
delivering oxygen to the blood and carrying carbon dioxide
away from it. As a result, people with emphysema have trouble
taking deep breaths and can become very tired after walking a
short distance. Emphysema can be diagnosed by examining the
lungs and by testing how strongly a person can exhale.
Emphysema is a chronic condition, and it has no cure.
There are many medicines that can slow down the disease’s
progress and reduce inflammation and possible infections.
There is no immunization for emphysema.
Air pollution, airborne toxic chemicals, and heredity
contribute to emphysema, but 80 to 90 percent of emphysema
is caused by smoking. The best way to keep people from
getting emphysema is to keep our air clean and to encourage
people not to smoke. Emphysema is a serious disease that is
highly preventable.
Tetanus
Tetanus is caused by a toxin formed when Clostridium tetani
bacteria enter the body through a wound or break in the skin,
most commonly through a puncture wound, such as you might
get if you step on something sharp. Tetanus bacteria normally
live in soil, dust, or animal droppings. Rust does not cause
tetanus, but the tetanus bacteria live in anaerobic, or oxygen-
free, conditions under rust.
The disease causes painful stiffness of muscles, lockjaw
(the inability to open the jaw), muscle spasms, and in some
cases, death. Symptoms appear from three to 21 days
after infection.
Tetanus is easy to avoid because proper immunization
gives complete protection. But the protection is not lifelong.
Medical experts recommend a booster injection every 10 years.
Most physicians will give a booster shot after any injury to a
patient even if the person has been previously immunized. If
the person has never received a tetanus shot, an immediate
injection of tetanus antitoxin will provide protection. Tetanus
immune globulin (plasma that contains antibodies) will be
given to people who have tetanus, along with additional
medical care.
A chronic disease
or condition is one
that lasts a long
time or recurs
over and over.
An acute disease
or condition lasts
only a short time.
Long-term second
hand smoke expo-
sure can also lead
to lung diseases in
nonsmokers and
must be avoided.


Protection against tetanus is especially important for people who spend a lot of time
outdoors. Gardeners and other people who work with manure-rich soil should wear
gloves for protection against tetanus.


30 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Lead Poisoning
Lead poisoning is caused by breathing in or ingesting (eating
or drinking) the metal lead. Lead stays in a person’s body and
builds up over time. Eventually, lead poisoning can harm the
brain, nerves, and blood. There is no immunization against
lead poisoning. Doctors can help a person get rid of some lead
in the body, but the damage already done is permanent.
Lead is found in many places. House paint used before
1978 may contain lead. The paint dust, flakes, and chips might
be breathed in or accidentally ingested. Small children often
gnaw on windowsills and other painted surfaces. They also
frequently put their hands into their mouths. These practices
may cause the children to ingest more lead than the adults
living in the same house.
Children are especially vulnerable to lead poisoning
because their growing bodies absorb lead very easily. However,
children whose healthy diets include enough calcium and iron
don’t absorb lead as quickly as children who are not getting
enough nutrients. Wash a child’s hands and toys often, and
use a damp sponge to keep surfaces clean of possible lead dust.
Be careful when
you participate
in activities and
hobbies that
involve lead,
such as soldering
and stained-
glass making.
Some people think that lead poisoning contributed
to the fall of the Roman Empire because lead was
commonly used in ancient times for things such as
cooking utensils, water pipes, and even makeup.
If you would like to have your house or building inspected for
lead, contact your local public health department.


PUBLIC HEALTH 31
.Diseases
Soil can contain lead, too, from deteriorating buildings
and from the lead in car exhaust. Lead pipes and solder used
in older homes can add lead to the water. In older homes that
have lead pipes, lead poisoning can be avoided by using cold
water for drinking and making baby formula. Hot water that
runs through old pipes will contain more lead than will cold
water. Food or drink held in lead-glazed pottery is another
source of lead buildup in a person’s body.
E. Coli Poisoning
Escherichia coli is a bacterium that causes a type of food poison-
ing. Different strains of E. coli normally live in the intestines of
humans and other animals and help with digestion. But some
strains cause illness and others produce toxins that are among
the most poisonous substances known.
The symptoms of E. coli poisoning can include bloody diar-
rhea and stomach cramps. People usually recover on their own
in a week. However, serious complications can develop in chil-
dren and elderly people that lead to kidney failure and death.
Eating undercooked beef or eating unwashed fruits and
vegetables are ways to get an E. coli infection. Unpasteurized
juices and alfalfa sprouts often are culprits. People with diar-
rhea can spread E. coli to others if they do not wash their
hands thoroughly or if they go swimming in a public place.
Be careful not to ingest water from a swimming pool, lake, or
other place where even small amounts of human and animal
feces may exist.
There is no
vaccination
for E. coli.


32 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Salmonellosis
Salmonellosis is a type of food poisoning caused by bacteria
that live in the intestines of animals and are transferred by
feces. Unwashed, raw vegetables are a common source of
salmonella because of the dirt and fertilizer often found on
them. Undercooked meats, including beef and poultry, can
harbor salmonella. Unwashed eggshells and the contents of
eggs can be a source of salmonella, too. The bacteria also
are found on reptiles, amphibians, fish, and pet birds.
The symptoms of salmonellosis include vomiting and
diarrhea, which occur 12 to 72 hours after infection. In children,
the elderly, and people with weakened immune systems,
salmonella poisoning can be serious and cause death. Treatment
includes keeping the person hydrated (giving them plenty of
water) and preventing the infection from spreading to others
through cross-contamination by food, water, and food utensils.
Most healthy people can overcome salmonellosis on their
own in about a week.
Report any cases
of food poison-
ing to your local
health department
so that public
health workers
can help prevent
other people
from getting sick
by the same
means you did.
Always wash your hands well after handling reptiles,
amphibians, fish, and pet birds—these critters can carry
salmonella bacteria.
There is no vaccine for salmonellosis. The best
ways to prevent illness are to eat meats that are
cooked well enough to kill the bacteria; wash all
fruits and vegetables; always prepare food on a
clean surface using clean utensils; and avoid foods
made with uncooked eggs, such as cookie dough.


.Diseases
Unpasteurized honey is another source
of botulism poisoning. Children younger
than 1 year old are susceptible to
infant botulism and should never con-
sume honey.
Botulism
Botulism is caused by a nerve toxin generated by Clostridium
botulinum bacteria. Botulism is most often a result of improp-
erly home-canned foods. Oils infused with garlic or herbs and
left at room temperature may also grow spores.
Symptoms appear between six hours and 10 days after a
person ingests toxin-infected food. Botulism causes paralysis
that moves through the body. Blurred vision, slurred speech,
difficulty swallowing, and muscle weakness are signs that a
person has botulism. When the paralysis reaches
the breathing muscles, a person can die.
Ventilators and other advanced care in a
hospital help a person stay alive while the body
fights the toxin. There is no vaccine for botulism,
but if diagnosed early, a patient can be treated
with an antitoxin to help prevent the spread of
the toxin through the blood.


34 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
HIV/AIDS
Acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) is a deadly
disease caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV).
AIDS greatly weakens a body’s immune system.
HIV/AIDS is spread through bodily fluids such as blood
and semen. Sexual contact can transmit AIDS. People who
share hypodermic needles can pass blood, and AIDS, from one
person to another. Babies can get AIDS from their mothers.
Treatment of the pregnant mother may prevent this.
Gonorrhea
Gonorrhea is a bacterial infection that most often affects the
mucous membrane in the genital area. However, it can also
affect the throat and anal areas. Gonorrhea, which is spread
through sexual contact with an infected person, is very
common. When left untreated, it can lead to serious illness.
The symptoms of gonorrhea usually are obvious in men:
pain when urinating and an abnormal discharge from the
penis. Symptoms in women are often mild or nonexistent.
However, gonorrhea can develop into a serious infection in
women called pelvic inflammatory disease. In both men and
women, untreated gonorrhea can get into the bloodstream and
cause damage to organs and joints.
Gonorrhea is a reportable disease, so once a person is
diagnosed with the infection the health care provider must
notify the Public Health Department, which in turn will notify
all those with whom there has been sexual contact.
Gonorrhea is diagnosed by a urine sample or an examina-
tion of a sample of tissue or discharge. There is no vaccine, but
antibiotics will cure the infection.
There is no vaccination or permanent cure for
AIDS. There are many useful drug treatments,
however, that can prevent the HIV infection
from developing into AIDS or treat AIDS if it
does develop.


PUBLIC HEALTH 35
.Diseases
Syphilis
Syphilis is a sexually transmitted disease caused by the
bacteria Treponema pallidum. The disease has three stages.
From 10 to 90 days after the initial infection, one or more sores
will appear, usually at the place where bacteria entered the
body. The sores disappear in a few weeks regardless of whether
or not you receive treatment. Even though the sores go away,
unless treatment has begun the disease remains active in
the body.
In the second stage, a rash will appear, most often on the
palms of the hands and soles of the feet. The rash does not
itch, and some do not notice it. In the third stage, the bacteria
can damage many organs such as the liver, eyes, and brain.
This damage is permanent and can lead to death.
Newborn babies can contract syphilis from their untreated
mothers during their birth.
Syphilis can be cured with antibiotics, but the antibiotics
cannot reverse the damage already done to organs in the later
stages of the disease. There is no vaccine for syphilis.
Herpes Simplex
Herpes simplex (types 1 and 2) is caused by a virus that
lives in body tissue. Type 1 usually appears on the mouth as
cold sores or fever blisters. Type 2 is called genital herpes and
appears as a cluster of tiny blisters filled with clear fluid on the
genitalia or anal area. Herpes usually is passed by skin-to-skin
contact with the area of the sore. Unfortunately, sores need not
be present for an infected person to be contagious.
A doctor can diagnose herpes by examining the sores.
There is no immunization for herpes, and no cure. Antiviral
creams and pills can shorten the duration of the blisters.
If people have
any unusual
sores, discharge,
or rashes, they
should see
a doctor.
Sexually transmitted diseases such as gonorrhea, syphilis, herpes
simplex, and AIDS can most easily and effectively be prevented by
personal abstinence and following guidelines recommended by your
parents or local public health agency.
A pregnant woman with herpes must tell her doctor immediately
because herpes is very serious in infants.


36 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Encephalitis
Encephalitis is a swelling of the brain. Many different viruses
and bacteria can cause it. Well-known causes of encephalitis
are the arboviruses, or viruses carried by ticks or mosquitoes.
Sometimes encephalitis stems from a complication of
another disease. For example, syphilis is a bacterial disease
that can cause swelling of the brain. Mumps, chicken pox, and
herpes are a few of the viral infections that can lead to
encephalitis. Treatment depends on the type of virus or
bacterium that caused the encephalitis. For example, if the
herpes virus causes the encephalitis, an antiviral herpes
medicine can be used.
Symptoms of encephalitis range from headache and
fever to unconsciousness or coma. Most cases are mild
with symptoms lasting only a few days, but severe cases of
encephalitis can lead to brain damage or death.


PUBLIC HEALTH 37
.Diseases
West Nile Virus
West Nile virus is a common disease in Africa, West Asia, and the
Middle East. But since about 2000, it has occurred throughout the
United States. While WNV causes no symptoms in most healthy
people, approximately one person out of 150 who has WNV will
become very ill. The victim may experience unusually severe
headaches, confusion, muscle weakness, and paralysis.
WNV is spread by the bite of an infected mosquito. Mosquitoes
become infected with the virus when they bite an infected bird or
animal before biting a human. To avoid WNV, avoid getting bitten by
mosquitoes. Mosquitoes lay their eggs in standing, stagnant water,
so stay away from stagnant water in places such as ditches or
discarded tires. Keep mosquitoes out of your home by having intact
screens on windows and doors. Wear long-sleeved shirts and pants,
apply insect repellent, and try to stay inside at dusk and dawn, when
mosquitoes are most active. Use of mosquito netting might also
be helpful.
There is no vaccine or cure for WNV. All donated blood is tested
for West Nile virus in the United States. People infected with WNV
usually get better on their own, but those who develop serious
symptoms should
seek immediate
medical attention.
Help keep mosquitoes from breeding by eliminating
stagnant water. Empty water from buckets, flower-
pots, and other water traps, such as old used tires.
Replace water in pet dishes and birdbaths daily.


38 PUBLIC HEALTH
Diseases.
Lyme Disease
Lyme disease is caused by bacteria of the Borrelia type.
Rodents and deer can carry this bacteria in their bloodstream.
It is transmitted to humans by the bite of an infected tick. After
feeding on an infected animal, a tick can pass on the disease
when they bite a human.
Scientists think that a tick must be attached 24 hours
before it can transfer the infection. Up to 80 percent of the
time, a small red rash develops at the site of the tick bite
within three to 32 days. The rash can develop a whitish ring
around the center red rash. There may also be a secondary,
larger red ring around the whitish area. The Lyme disease rash
is called a bull’s-eye rash. Flulike symptoms may occur. Later,
joint swelling, arthritis, enlargement of the heart, and other
serious symptoms can develop.
Lyme disease usually can be cured with a three- to four-
week treatment of oral antibiotics. In more advanced cases,
intravenous antibiotics may be necessary.
Lyme disease is difficult to diagnose, so if you remove a
tick or visit areas known to have infected ticks and develop
a rash or fever, see your doctor. There is no vaccine for
Lyme disease.
(Actual size)
Adult male tick Adult female tick
(Actual size)


PUBLIC HEALTH 39
.Diseases
You can lessen your risk for Lyme disease by frequently
checking yourself and your clothing for ticks when you are
in tick-infested areas. Wear long pants tucked into high socks
when you walk through woods, tall grass, and underbrush.
Wear closed shoes or boots and long-sleeved shirts. Light-
colored clothing will show ticks better than dark-colored. Use
tick or insect repellent on your clothing, but do not put it
on your hands or face. Ticks are usually found low, near the
ground. They like shady, moist environments. Always work to
keep ticks and other disease vectors away from your home by
keeping lawns mowed, removing brush and leaves, and mov-
ing wood piles away from your house. Keep pets out of wooded
areas to prevent ticks from entering your home.
To protect yourself from tick bites while hiking or camping,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention suggests using
insect repellant, wearing clothing treated with permethrin, and
drying clothes on high heat when you return home.
First Aid for a Tick Bite
An infected tick carries bacteria in its saliva, which it stores in its gut
or salivary glands. Do not use nail polish, petroleum jelly, or a hot
match to help remove a tick. Simply use tweezers or a tissue to grasp
the tick as close to your skin as possible. Steadily and gently, pull up
until the tick lets go. Treat the bite area of your skin with antiseptic,
and don’t forget to wash your hands. Contact your health-care
provider if symptoms develop.





PUBLIC HEALTH 41
.Food Safety and Sanitation
Food Safety
and Sanitation
The purity of foods is an important factor in public health.
Contaminated foods and drinks can spread illness. This is why
public health professionals seek to improve methods of sup-
plying food. They work to keep food free from contamination,
adulteration (dilution or impurities), dangerous additives, and
spoilage that might harm consumers.
The Food and Drug Administration
is an independent agency of the U.S.
government with a major responsibility
for regulating food-processing plants and
training inspectors and restaurant
operators in safe food-handling practices.
State and local health officers inspect
restaurants and supermarkets to make
sure they obey sanitation regulations.
Some standards are voluntary. However,
the fines and negative publicity that follow
reports of uncleanness help to ensure that
people will comply with regulations.
Food-borne gastroenteritis is caused by food that
is contaminated by bacteria, viruses, and parasites.
Toxic (poisonous) substances and dangerous
chemicals also can cause food poisoning. For
example, some varieties of mushrooms are toxic.


42 PUBLIC HEALTH
Food Safety and Sanitation.
Sanitation Standards
Each year, thousands of Americans become ill from eating
unsafe foods. Many factors can cause these illnesses, but
most involve carelessness by a food handler. Food should
be properly processed, handled, and stored.
Food Storage
Store nonperishable foods in clean, well-ventilated, and well-lit
areas on clean shelves or on pallets. Do not store food on the
floor. Hold perishable foods at temperatures below 40 degrees
Fahrenheit. Store frozen foods at zero degrees Fahrenheit. It is
important to keep hot foods hot (or above 140 degrees) before
serving, cold (or below 40 degrees) during storage, and in a
vacuum (cans and vacuum jars) if storage must be at
room temperature.
Do not allow foods to stay at temperatures between 40
degrees and 140 degrees for more than two hours. It is prefer-
able that foods be kept between these temperatures for no more
than half an hour. This temperature danger zone allows micro-
organisms to greatly multiply. Food that is lightly contaminated
Refrigeration does not kill microorganisms, but it keeps them
from multiplying.


PUBLIC HEALTH 43
.Food Safety and Sanitation
with microorganisms can be safe to eat, but let those microor-
ganisms grow for more than a few hours, and you have
something that can make you very sick. This is one reason to
be very careful when defrosting foods.
Food Handling and Preparation
Even the best handling cannot improve poor-quality or unwhole-
some foods. People should not eat dirty or spoiled foods.
Preventing food contamination is the most reliable way to
avoid food poisoning. Use screens or other coverings to protect
food from contamination by insects or rodents. Keep poisons
used to kill pests away from food. Keep domestic animals and
pets away from food to prevent them from spreading droplets
from their coughs or sneezes onto food. These discharges often
contain organisms that can cause disease.
Anyone handling food must be strict about personal clean-
liness, which starts with clean hands. Food preparers must
wash their hands before handling any food; after using the
toilet, changing a diaper, and handling pets; and after being
contaminated with a cough or sneeze. Wash hands with warm
water and soap; use a scrub brush if possible. Dry hands with
a clean towel.
People preparing food should wear clean clothing. Street
clothes may be contaminated and should be changed. Contain
hair on the head with a cap, net, or a band, and contain beards
with a net. Hold utensils only by their handles. Also, those
who prepare food should never have any open sores on
their hands.
Wash fruits and vegetables well, especially if you will be
eating them uncooked. They may have been exposed to water
or soil contaminated with animal or human feces, or they may
have been sprayed with herbicides and pesticides.
Food preparation
guidelines are
as important for
Scouts while
camping as
they are for
food handlers
in restaurants.
A good rule of thumb is to keep cold foods
cold and hot foods hot. Defrosting should be
done in a refrigerator, above freezing but below
40 degrees Fahrenheit.


44 PUBLIC HEALTH
Food Safety and Sanitation.
Here are a few temperature guidelines for
safe cooking:
• Ground beef, which has many small surfaces on
which bacteria can grow, should be heated to an
internal temperature of at least 160 degrees.
• Roasts and steaks should be cooked to an internal
temperature of 145 degrees.
• Chicken should have an internal temperature of 180
degrees, and its juices should be clear.
• Eggs should never be eaten raw or partially cooked,
including eggs used in recipes (for instance,
cookie dough).
“Instantaneous” food thermometers are relatively inexpen-
sive, and trying to estimate temperatures without them will
not work well. They tell a cook when food has been heated
enough to kill microorganisms. Food thermometers can be
stuck into food such as a roast turkey, or into a pot of boiling
fruit to be made into jam.


PUBLIC HEALTH 45
.Food Safety and Sanitation
CLEANING DISHES AND UTENSILS AT HOME
Even if you use an automatic dishwasher in your home, it’s
important to know how to properly clean dishes by hand.
• Scrape leftover food into the trash.
• Fill the sink with hot, soapy water.
• Let dishes soak a few minutes while the water cools a bit.
(Wash knives separately to avoid reaching into the suds and
accidentally cutting yourself.)
• Use a clean sponge or dishrag to scrub the dishes in hot
soapy water, then rinse the dishes with clean, hot water.
• Let the dishes air-dry on a rack, or use a clean cloth to
dry them. Air-drying is preferred.
Avoid Cross-Contamination
Raw meats can contain E. coli and salmonella bacteria. That is
why it is important to cook meats well before you eat them. But
you must also be careful with knives, cutting boards, and other
surfaces that can carry the juices of raw meat to other things.
If you cut raw chicken on a cutting board and don’t wash
the board before using it to cut carrots, the carrots might pick
up bacteria that will make you sick. An unwashed knife could
spread infection the same way. Raw-meat juices also could drip
from a higher shelf to a lower shelf in the refrigerator, infect-
ing a sandwich or piece of fruit. Being aware of the dangers
of cross-contamination will help you avoid small mistakes that
can lead to big stomachaches.
Make ice cubes using only clean water that comes
from an approved, safe water source.





PUBLIC HEALTH 47
.Sanitation in the Community and at Camp
Sanitation in the
Community and at Camp
Just as you work to keep your home clean for your family,
public health officials work to keep your community—the
public buildings, water supply, and sewage systems—working
at safe levels for the entire population. At camp, there are
safeguards to help ensure everyone has a healthy and safe
outdoor experience.
Solid Waste Disposal
Solid waste disposal is becoming one of our society’s major
problems. Solid waste includes paper, cardboard, cans, bottles,
plastics, food scraps, floor sweepings, industrial waste, and
yard clippings. Commonly called garbage, some solid waste
will decompose, such as food scraps and edibles from the
kitchen. Other items—like plastics, metals, glass, many types
of paper, and construction debris—will remain virtually
unchanged in a landfill. Many items can be recycled.
The amount of solid waste increases each year, and
so does the problem of solid waste disposal. Improper or
unsanitary conditions provide breeding places for insects and
rodents that carry disease. Other problems at waste disposal
sites include fire dangers, safety hazards, and an unattractive
appearance. Improper handling can sometimes lead to air and
water pollution.


48 PUBLIC HEALTH
Sanitation in the Community and at Camp.
Remember that camps and homes, as well as communities,
have waste storage or disposal sites. Most insects and rodents
can be controlled if storage and disposal areas are kept clean
and neat. The municipal government is responsible for com-
munity waste storage and disposal. All other responsibilities for
cleanliness belong to homeowners and individuals.
Wastes usually are collected and disposed of under the
direction of a public or government agency. Public workers or
private contractors may do this work. Most waste is buried. In
urban areas, the landfill might be far from the city that creates
the waste. There are accepted laws and regulations for creating
and operating landfills.
Some wastes are burned, or incinerated. Compared with
landfills, incinerators reduce the amount of wastes, and the
heat from incinerator facilities is often used to generate power.
However, removing toxic wastes, ensuring that all waste is
completely burned, and keeping harmful substances from
entering the air are technically difficult. Ash from incinerators
must be buried.
Recycling
Incinerators can create air pollution. Landfills take a lot of space,
and no one wants to live near a landfill. One way to reduce
the need for new waste disposal facilities and to make existing
landfills more efficient is to recycle.
A number of items that go
into landfills and incinerators can
be recycled. Many plastics, metals,
building materials, yard clippings,
leaf litter, and paper can be
recycled. Recycling helps to con-
serve natural resources because it
reduces the amount of solid waste
being sent for disposal. The more
material that is removed from the
waste stream (the total volume of
solid wastes produced), the longer
existing landfills can operate.
One difference between a landfill and a dump is that
a landfill is covered with dirt at the end of each day.


PUBLIC HEALTH 49
.Sanitation in the Community and at Camp
Waste Storage and Disposal at Home
and at Camp
At home and in camp:
• Use approved containers (like the ones supplied by a
garbage removal company) to hold solid wastes until they
can be collected or disposed of properly.
• Make storage facilities convenient and sanitary.
• Use containers that are strong, rust resistant, watertight with
tight-fitting lids, and easily filled, emptied, and cleaned.
• Keep containers clean.
You can help your storage situation at home by using racks or
stands outside that will keep containers about 18 inches above
the ground and allow easy cleaning. Storage racks are easily
made from wood, pipe, or metal. Concrete pads on the ground
are acceptable, but raised racks are preferable.
Waste disposal in camp is often more difficult than at
home. Camps, however, are bound by the same regulations
as any business in the community. Waste must be disposed
of correctly while at camp or on the trail. Camps should have
enough approved containers (cans or bins) to hold all wastes
that normally are generated between collections.
At camp, store
filled plastic
bags inside metal
containers for
better cleanliness
and to make it
harder for animals
to gain access.
In communities that aggressively recycle, the volume of waste material has been
reduced by up to 25 percent. Unfortunately, communities with aggressive recycling
programs are in the minority.


50 PUBLIC HEALTH
Sanitation in the Community and at Camp.
Burning solid waste on the trail creates both a fire hazard
and odors that can attract animals. It also will likely conflict
with the land manager’s policy, so it should not be done. Food
scraps can draw animals close to campsites where they might
lose their fear of humans. That can be dangerous for them and
for you. Animals can detect and dig up buried trash, which
also creates potential sites where mosquitoes can breed.
When camping in the wilderness, be sure to follow
the “Leave No Trace” principles. Set a goal to leave
no trace that humans were ever there. Always pack
out everything that was packed in, including all
wrappers, cans, boxes, foil, and food scraps. Pack
recyclable items separately to be disposed of
properly after the trip.


PUBLIC HEALTH 51
.Sanitation in the Community and at Camp
Water and Wastewater Treatment
Untreated water causes infection and disease and can contain
contaminants like lead, mercury, and pesticides. Infectious
agents that cause diseases such as cholera, salmonellosis, and
hepatitis may also be present in untreated water. Drinking
water must be treated and tested often. Water in recreational
facilities such as water parks, swimming pools, and lakes
should not be swallowed or placed in your mouth. Trace
amounts of animal and human feces can infect water, as can
naturally occurring bacteria and parasites.
Latrines and Catholes
Human bodily waste can be buried if
sanitary facilities are not available. If
you will be camping in the same area
for a few days, you will want to build
a latrine. Otherwise, on the trail, dig-
ging catholes for disposal of bodily
wastes is recommended because flies
and rodents breed in human and ani-
mal waste. Using a small trowel, dig a
hole 6 to 8 inches deep. (You will want
several inches of soil to cover the hole
later.) Locate catholes at least 200 feet
from any body of water, the trail, and
the campsite. When you are done,
cover the hole completely with loose
soil, tamping down lightly. Leave the site
in a natural condition.
There are many microscopic parasites in water that are difficult to kill.
Among them, Cryptosporidium parvum is difficult to kill because
of its hard outer shell. Chlorine does not always do the job. Avoid
swallowing water when you swim, even in a chlorinated pool. The
disease Cryptosporidiosis causes diarrhea and fever and is the reason
that water should be filtered or boiled before drinking.


52 PUBLIC HEALTH
Sanitation in the Community and at Camp.
Safe Water
Water from all city water supplies must be tested regularly.
Federal and state governments have created strict standards
that must be maintained for pH (acidity), color, particulates
(small particles), taste, and chemicals.
Some communities draw their water from deep under-
ground aquifers (groundwater). In many parts of the country,
drinking water is drawn from surface sources rather than
underground aquifers. Water must be treated, usually by
screening, filtration, and chemical applications. Municipal
water is stored in tanks—generally above the ground so that
gravity will provide water pressure—and delivered to homes
by a network of distribution pipes.
Treating Drinking Water at Camp
Finding safe water when camping might be difficult. Most mod-
ern campgrounds and park facilities have safe water available.
But any surface water—even water that looks clear and
inviting—should be thought of as unsafe to drink.
Assume that all water from an above-ground source—such
as a lake, stream, river, pond, or creek—must be treated. Many
subsurface (groundwater) sources of water, such as wells, are
polluted, and that water must be treated before it can be
considered safe to consume. Polluted water can be successfully
treated in the field, unless contaminated by chemical pollut-
ants. (Most chemical pollutants are of human origin, but a
few occur naturally.)
If you need to filter water con-
taining silt or organic contami-
nants before disinfecting it,
collect the water in a container
and let the particles settle to the
bottom of the container. Use a
clean cloth to filter the water
as it is collected or, after
collecting it, gently pour the
water through the top of the
cloth and let it filter through
into a second container below.


PUBLIC HEALTH 53
.Sanitation in the Community and at Camp
Boiling, Filters, and
Chemical Treatment
Bringing water to a rolling boil for a full min-
ute or more will kill most organisms. Boiling
is the best way to treat your own water. When
you are at elevations higher than 6,500 feet,
boil the water for three minutes to be sure all
organisms are killed.
You also can use a combination of filters
and chemical treatment tablets to treat
your water.
FILTERS
Camping stores and catalogs offer water
treatment filters that are easy to use. Follow
the instructions that come with the filter you
have. According to the CDC, filters that stop
Cryptosporidium parvum and Giardia lamblia
(a tiny parasite) will have one of these four
claims on the package:
• Reverse osmosis
• Absolute pore size of 1 micron or smaller
• Tested and certified by NSF Standard 53
or NSF Standard 58 for cyst removal
• Tested and certified by NSF Standard 53 or NSF Standard 58
for cyst reduction
Cryptosporidium parvum may not be filtered out by filters that
say the following:
• Nominal pore size of less than 1 micron
• One micron filter
• Effective against parasites
• Carbon filter
• Water purifier
• EPA approved*
• Activated carbon
Bringing water that has been
filtered to a full rolling boil for a
minute or longer is the best option
for treating water. Be sure to bring
enough fuel!
*Warning: The EPA does not approve or test filters.


54 PUBLIC HEALTH
Sanitation in the Community and at Camp.
Most filters that you can carry on a campout don’t filter
out viruses. Also, even well-made filters might have flaws that
allow some organisms to pass through accidentally. That is
why it is important to use chemical treatment tablets on the
water as well.
Because the straining cartridges on filters have collected
organisms from the water, the person who changes the cartridge
should be in good health and wear gloves while changing the
cartridge. That person should dispose of the filter properly, and
then wash his or her hands.
TABLETS
Water treatment tablets are sold in small containers just the
right size for hikers and campers. The instructions on the label
usually are to drop one or two tablets into a quart of water
and then wait 30 minutes before drinking—longer if the water
is cold. The tablets might also leave a chemical taste in the
water. To improve the flavor, add some flavored drink mix after
the tablets have had enough time to do their work (i.e., after
30 minutes).
Chemical treatment tablets kill many—but not all—bacteria,
viruses, and parasites. Cryptosporidium parvum, Giardia
lamblia, and some bacteria will not be killed. That is why
the tablets alone don’t guarantee safe drinking water.
Treatment tablets can lose their effectiveness after the bottle
has been opened. Check the expiration date on the label and use
only fresh tablets.


PUBLIC HEALTH 55
.Sanitation in the Community and at Camp
Dishwashing in Camp
Whether you cook with a stove or over an open fire, put on
two pots of water before you serve a meal. That way you will
have hot dishwater by the time you finish eating.
Set up the dishwater. Boil a pot of water. Add a small amount of
biodegradable dishwashing liquid and some cold treated water
so that you can use it without burning your hands.
Set up the rinse water. In a second large pot, boil water to rinse
the dishes.
Wash the dishes. Scrape all excess food on the plate into a garbage
or plastic bag that you will pack out. Then (a) scrub the dish in the
wash water and (b) use tongs to rinse the clean dish in hot rinse
water, or (c) if you want to use a cold rinse, dip dishes in cold water
that has been treated with six drops of unscented chlorine bleach per
gallon of water at least 30 minutes before use. Allow dishes to air-dry
on a clean, plastic sheet. When dry, store in a flyproof container.
Dispose of the dishwater. When you are finished washing dishes,
strain food particles from the dishwater. Put the food particles in a
resealable plastic bag that you will pack out. Then take the water at
least 200 feet from the campsite, water source, and trails. Give it a
good fling, spreading it over a wide area.
Hot Hot Cold


56 PUBLIC HEALTH
Sanitation in the Community and at Camp.
Sewage and Liquid Waste
Sewage has the potential to spread disease, so it must be
properly disposed of both at home and at camp. Wastewater
from toilets is called blackwater. Water from washing dishes,
bathing, and doing laundry is called graywater. If discharged
improperly, either type of wastewater can contribute to
water pollution.
Most urban and suburban dwellers in the United States
dispose of sewage and liquid wastes through municipal disposal
systems. In rural areas of the country, many homeowners have
their own septic systems for household waste.
Never put
anything into
a water source
that you would
not be willing
to drink. Keep Soap and Detergent Away
From Open Water
Many soaps, detergents, and shampoos contain
chemicals that encourage algae to grow. Algae can
crowd out native plants, making it harder for fish
and other animals to survive. Soap and detergent
can leave an oily film in water that can harm tiny
aquatic life. Even biodegradable soap should be
kept away from any stream, lake, or spring. Carry
your pot of water away from the source, and use
it to bathe or wash dishes. Scatter water over the
ground, across a wide area, when you are finished.
You can make a strainer by punching small holes in
a plastic bag and filling it with pine needles. Pour
dirty dishwater through the bag and the needles will
strain out food particles. Carry the bag of needles
out of the backcountry with the rest of your trash.


PUBLIC HEALTH 57
.Sanitation in the Community and at Camp
Municipal Sewage Treatment Systems
Municipal sewage treatment systems are designed to handle
large volumes of sewage and liquid wastes. The raw sewage
flows to a treatment plant through underground pipes (mains).
Sewage is screened, allowed to settle, processed, dried, and
disinfected before disposal.
Screening removes objects larger than an inch or two in
size that have entered sewage mains. The screens are periodi-
cally cleaned. Debris is removed and then taken to a landfill
or burned.
By the time incoming waste reaches the sewage treatment
plant, it is mostly liquid with particles suspended in it. Many
suspended particles drop out of the liquid portion as the
screened sewage is allowed to settle.
Processing or treatment is done by two basic methods:
activated sludge and trickling. In both methods, bacteria break
down the sewage into harmless components that can be
safely discharged.
In the activated sludge method, the sewage is pumped into
a tank. Air is bubbled through the sewage to provide oxygen
needed by the bacteria. After the bacteria have worked on the
sewage long enough, the liquid contents of the tank can be
pumped out. The material remaining at the bottom of the tank,
called sludge, can be dried.
Requirement 5a calls for a visit to a municipal wastewater
treatment facility like this one, or to a solid-waste management
operation in your community.


58 PUBLIC HEALTH
Sanitation in the Community and at Camp.
Trickling involves filtering the sewage over a bed of rocks
on which bacteria grow. In time, the liquid can be pumped out
and the accumulated sludge dried. The sludge, after drying,
can be buried in a landfill or used as a soil conditioner.
Treated wastewater is usually clear and colorless. At this
point, the water is free of contaminants and can be pumped
into a river or other body of water for disposal. In some states,
the water is piped to automatic lawn sprinklers and used to
recharge underground water supplies. The outflow from mod-
ern treatment plants is so high in quality that it can go to a
chlorinating station and be reused for drinking water.
Septic Systems
Millions of homes have their own septic systems. Homes that
are built far from municipal mains, such as homes in rural
areas, use septic tanks.
Wastewater from the home flows through a pipe into the
septic tank, which is made of material such as concrete or
steel. Solids settle to the bottom of the tank, and liquid flows
out into a series of buried pipes. The liquid trickles through
holes in the pipes and enters the gravel and soil of the leach
field. The water seeps through the field and is cleaned of
organic material—not with harsh chemicals, but with microor-
ganisms that live in the soil. Eventually, this water will enter
an underground aquifer (a naturally occurring water basin).
Apartment complexes, shopping centers, camps, and similar
properties will sometimes have a small sewage treatment
plant on their grounds. This type of plant operates on the same
principles as an activated sludge plant, only on a smaller scale.


PUBLIC HEALTH 59
.Sanitation in the Community and at Camp
Bacteria break down some of the solids that remain
behind in the tank. Chemicals that kill bacteria should not be
put into the septic system. Medicines such as antibiotics will
destroy helpful bacteria. Motor oils, gasoline, paints, solvents,
pesticides, and herbicides will do the same thing. Grease,
paper towels, and excessive amounts of food will not kill
bacteria but will clog the pipes.
The sludge in the septic tank should be pumped out by a
professional every two to five years, depending on the size of
the tank and the number of people using it.
A home septic system
PRIVATE HOME
PIPE WITH TIGHT JOINTS, LAID
ON UNDISTURBED EARTH
MINIMUM 10 FEET
WELL
PLUG
SEPTIC
TANK
ABSORPTION
FIELD TRENCH
DISTRIBUTION
BOX
DRAIN
TILE LAID
WITH OPEN
JOINTS IN
CRUSHED
ROCK,
GRAVEL,
OR SLAG
FILTER
MATERIAL
MINIMUM
100 FEET
Leach fields should be at least 100 feet from any
drinking water supply. The fields should be checked
every year to make sure they are not flooding.


South Boston, Massachusetts, in 1973 (top) and 2012 (bottom)


PUBLIC HEALTH 61
.Pollution and Health
Pollution and Health
Environmental pollution—including air, water, and noise pollu-
tion—affects individual and public health in many serious ways.
Pollutants can enter the body as a person breathes, eats, or
drinks, and through the eyes, nose, ears, and skin.
Air Pollution
The major sources of air pollution are automobiles, power
plants, and factories. They burn fuels, including fossil fuels
such as natural gas, oil, or coal, that send unhealthy chemicals
and particulates into the air. Dry-cleaning chemicals, wildfires,
and decomposing garbage, which gives off methane gas, are a
few of the many other sources of air pollution.
Drops of sulfur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen can combine
with moisture and turn into acid rain, which can pollute our
water supplies and our land.
Ozone is a form of oxygen, but it can be a poison. It forms
in the lower atmosphere, or troposphere, from nitrogen oxides
and organic gases from automobiles and industry. High levels of
it irritate everyone’s lungs, but especially people with asthma,
bronchitis, and emphysema. Ozone can also kill trees and
damage rubber. Scientists are investigating the many possible
effects of breathing in ozone.
Particulate matter can easily get deep into the lungs.
Inhaled particulates cause illness and even death.
For instance, people with heart disease are more
likely to have heart attacks when the particulate
matter in the air is high.


62 PUBLIC HEALTH
Pollution and Health.
The ozone layer, however, far up in the part of the atmo-
sphere called the stratosphere, helps protect Earth from the
damaging rays of the sun. Since the 1970s, scientists have been
concerned that the ozone layer is depleting because of our use
of various chemicals that react with the ozone and destroy
it. The depletion of the protective ozone layer makes every-
thing on Earth more exposed to radiation from the sun, which
increases incidences of cancer. Though we don’t want ozone in
our troposphere, we need it up high in our stratosphere.
REFLECTED
RADIATION ESCAPING
HEAT
ATMOSPHERE
SHORT
WAVELENGTH
RADIATION
LONG
WAVELENGTH
RADIATION
TRAPPED BY
ATMOSPHERE
EARTH
The greenhouse effect
The Greenhouse Effect
Gases such as carbon dioxide and methane collect in the atmosphere.
They reflect heat from the ground back on Earth, warming it. This situ-
ation may cause long-term climatic changes to our ecosystems. Some
species of animals may have to change habitats. Although there is
some scientific evidence of what is popularly called global warming,
many scientists remain skeptical about it.


PUBLIC HEALTH 63
.Pollution and Health
The Environmental Protection Agency monitors and
sets standards for air quality. It also regulates many sources of
air pollution. As new scientific studies are published about air
pollution and the public health, the EPA wants to set stricter
rules to limit air pollution.
There are two basic ways to prevent air pollution. End-of-
the-pipe devices filter some of the chemicals and particles out of
exhaust from factories and automobiles. The catalytic converter
used on cars is an example of this type of device.
Until we learn more about how to prevent pollution, we
can at least try to control and minimize it. Manufacturing can
be designed to produce less waste. Individuals can drive less—
and instead take advantage of public transportation, carpooling,
and bicycling. We can all become aware of how important and
far-reaching issues of air pollution are.
Water Pollution
Only about 2 percent of the world’s water is available for
drinking. During the 20th century, much of the world’s avail-
able freshwater supply became polluted. The overall popula-
tion growth and expansion of cities make maintaining water
quality challenging.
There are two main sources of water pollution. Point
sources are easy to recognize. For example, a factory dumping
chemical waste directly into a river is a point source of water
pollution. Nonpoint sources are harder to detect, track, and
stop. These sources pollute the water indirectly. For example,
buried waste, including landfills and buried hazardous wastes,
can leach into water supplies.
An ecosystem is a community of organisms and
their environment, all working together as a unit.


64 PUBLIC HEALTH
Pollution and Health.
Herbicides, pesticides, fertilizers, and other chemicals are
another source of pollution. Rain can wash the chemicals and
soil into nearby streams, rivers, and lakes. Also, the chemicals
can soak down into the ground, where they can end up in
an aquifer.
Lead, mercury, pesticides, and other toxic ingredients of
polluted water can build up in our bodies and cause acute
illnesses, like diarrhea, and chronic ones, like organ damage
and cancer. Indirectly, polluted water can affect us by way of
the food chain. If a plant uses water that is contaminated with
a toxic chemical, and then we eat that plant, we can ingest
that chemical. If we eat an animal that ate that plant, the
concentration of the chemical is even higher.
Water pollution adversely affects all kinds of living things.
Detergent can ruin an ecosystem by allowing an overgrowth of
plants and algae. When those greater-than-normal amounts of
plants and algae die, the decomposition depletes the oxygen in
the water. Fish suffocate and die, and other wildlife higher up
the food chain suffers as well.
A nonpoint source of pollution occurs when automobiles drip
engine oil into the street, then rain washes that oil into the
gutters, and then into streams and rivers.


PUBLIC HEALTH 65
.Pollution and Health
People can safeguard water supplies in many ways. We
can protect watersheds—the land areas from which water drains
into rivers and lakes. Controlling chemical contamination of
water is a high priority. Industrial chemicals are relatively easy
to control when factories follow EPA guidelines. People can
be careful of what goes into storm drains and not dump used
engine oil, automobile coolant, paint, and other chemicals
into the street. Homeowners can limit their use of pesticides,
herbicides, and fertilizers on their lawns or use organic methods
of lawn care and gardening instead. Campers can avoid using
detergents near streams and other groundwater sources.
Watershed dams like the one shown here help control runoff from streams and hold
and store polluting sediment. Wherever you live, you are in a watershed.


66 PUBLIC HEALTH
Pollution and Health.
Noise Pollution
Unwanted or loud noises are pollutants, too. Excessive noise can
lead to hearing loss, headaches, and stress. Some people live
where they are regularly subjected to loud noises. Machinery,
automobiles, and trucks can all be noisy. Radios, stereos, and
other entertainment equipment also contribute to hearing loss.
Headphones are great for sparing the people around someone
who is listening to music, but they concentrate noise in the
listener’s ears and can damage them.
The damage caused by noise is cumulative—it adds up
over time. With each exposure to loud noises, a person suffers
a tiny—often unnoticeable—loss of hearing. Eventually, the
hearing loss becomes significant.
Noise also happens at home. Power tools, lawn mowers,
and televisions contribute to noise pollution. Indoor appliances
such as blow-dryers and vacuum cleaners make noise. Some
hobbies can be noisy, such as shooting sports and woodwork-
ing power tools. Also noisy are recreational vehicles such as
motorboats, snowmobiles, motorcycles, and cars without
If they aren’t used with
caution, headphones can
be especially damaging
to your hearing.
Rock musicians often wear earplugs when perform-
ing to protect their hearing. Fans who sit in front of
loudspeakers may suffer transient, or temporary,
hearing loss from a few hours to a few days after
a concert.


PUBLIC HEALTH 67
.Pollution and Health
mufflers. In addition to hearing loss, noise can contribute
to stress (physical and mental), sleep loss, and irritability,
and can lead to health-related problems such as depression,
gastrointestinal problems, and cardiovascular disease.
The technology exists to reduce noise pollution. Jet
engines are much quieter now than they used to be. Buildings
are being designed that limit noise. The Occupational Safety
and Health Administration regulates noise in workplaces,
requiring employers to reduce noise exposure that could be
harmful to employees. However, noise-reduction programs
require commitment and money. People should wear hearing
protection wherever noise either is not or cannot be controlled.
Most hearing loss is permanent; most of it also is preventable.
Noise pollution harms more than just humans. It has
been shown that aircraft noise reduces the survival rate
of caribou calves. Marine life is harmed by noise in the
oceans from offshore drilling and ship traffic. Sonar—the
sending of sound waves to detect military submarines
and to chart the ocean floor—can be damaging to whales
that use their own natural sonar to survive.





PUBLIC HEALTH 69
.Tobacco, Alcohol, and Drugs
Tobacco, Alcohol,
and Drugs
Tobacco, alcohol, illegal drugs, and abuse of prescription
drugs are a significant source of morbidity and mortality in
the United States and around the world. The World Health
Organization considers tobacco use to be an epidemic because
it kills 6 million people every year. Using these substances can
damage the body, lead to accompanying diseases, and cause
great numbers of injuries and accidents.
Tobacco
Tobacco contains more than 4,000 chemical compounds, many
of which cause emphysema and cancer. In fact, cigarette smok-
ing causes 87 percent of lung cancer—a rarely cured disease
with poor survival rates. It is one of the leading causes of
death worldwide. Smoking contributes greatly to heart disease
and stroke as well.
Most smokers began smoking before they were 18 years
old. Because nicotine is one of the most addictive substances
known to humans, young adults who start using tobacco often
become hooked for life. Smoking also causes many
diseases that affect indirect users,
such as people who inhale second-
hand smoke and unborn babies
who suffer the effects of their
mothers’ addiction to tobacco.


70 PUBLIC HEALTH
Tobacco, Alcohol, and Drugs.
Not only does smoking affect the lungs and cardiovascular
system, it also affects the skin’s chemistry, causing it to age
much faster than normal, so smokers get more wrinkles at an
earlier age than do nonsmokers. In addition, tobacco contrib-
utes to tooth decay, gum disease, and early loss of teeth.
Alcohol
Alcohol can injure your body, especially your liver and brain.
Alcohol is absorbed through the stomach, enters the blood-
stream, and is processed by the liver. A deadly disease that can
be caused by the overconsumption of alcohol is cirrhosis of the
liver. Over time, this disease causes the liver to malfunction.
Alcohol also can damage the digestive system, pancreas, and
nervous system. Heavy drinkers are prone to oral and throat
cancers, and liver cancer. Alcohol also can cause serious dam-
age to unborn children.
Alcohol is a sedative; it interferes with reflexes and brain
function. It makes people react slowly to their environment.
People who are intoxicated have trouble walking, speaking,
and driving. Sometimes people who drink too much alcohol
die because their body becomes so sedate, or slow, that their
breathing and heart rate simply slow to a stop.
Smokeless tobacco—chewing tobacco and snuff—is
dangerous, too. The carcinogens, or cancer-causing
agents, act on the cheeks and gums at the spot
where a user keeps a chaw of tobacco. The car-
cinogens don’t stop at the mouth—tobacco use
increases the incidence of all kinds of cancers.
Being personally responsible to yourself is part
of growing up. Remember that the decisions you
make go hand in hand with their consequences.


PUBLIC HEALTH 71
.Tobacco, Alcohol, and Drugs
Although you might be too young to drive a car, be aware of the
dangers of drinking and driving. Even a small amount of alcohol
can make a person an unsafe driver, and the results are often tragic.
Thousands of teenagers die every year in crashes involving drivers
who have been drinking. Never ride in a car being driven by some-
one who has been drinking. Never let someone who has been drink-
ing drive a vehicle. You can always find another way home, but you
might not live through a crash caused by a drunken driver.


72 PUBLIC HEALTH
Tobacco, Alcohol, and Drugs.
Drugs
Drugs alter the body’s chemistry. Young people should never
use illegal drugs or drugs that don’t come from their doctors.
Marijuana, cocaine and crack, alcohol, ecstasy, LSD, heroin,
inhalants (huffing), steroids, and even pain relievers like
codeine, oxycodone, and hydrocodone have powerful effects
on the mind and body. They can produce temporary feelings of
pleasure or energy. However, they also can cause nightmares,
fear, and loss of ability to make safe decisions. An overdose
can lead to serious illness, disability, or even death.
Drug users often take risks that endanger their safety
and well-being. Accidental overdoses are at an all-time high in
many areas of the United States. People have drowned, fallen
to their deaths, and died in motor vehicle crashes while using
drugs. Besides deaths due to accidents, drug use can also harm
other people by spreading hepatitis B and C or HIV/AIDS
through using commonly shared drug paraphernalia.
Many drugs are addictive. After using a drug, a person
might soon have an uncontrollable desire for it. Becoming
addicted to drugs can occur after just one use. Overdosing and
death can occur at any time with drug usage. Users often lie,
cheat, and steal to get the drug. It can be
physically and emotionally dangerous to stop using the drug
without professional help. A drug can become more important
to the user than friends, family, and even staying alive.
Be a leader, and use your own good judgment. Stay away
from drugs and drug users.


PUBLIC HEALTH 73
.Tobacco, Alcohol, and Drugs





PUBLIC HEALTH 75
.Careers in Public Health
Careers in Public Health
Anyone interested in helping people or doing detective work
should consider a career in public health. Public health profes-
sionals find satisfaction in working to improve life for people
who live in their communities. Public health is a discipline that
can be applied in almost any place in the world. In fact, many
countries desperately need public health workers.
Most public health professionals have training after college
graduation in epidemiology, biostatistics, health behavior/edu-
cation, health policy/management, and environmental health.
Who They Are
Many public health workers are scientists, doctors, nurses,
and educators. Public health can use people with many other
talents as well. For example, an engineer might work to design
safer roadways or a better type of water treatment plant for the
health of a community.
In the field of medicine, public health is a recognized
specialty. Some providers have advanced training in public
health. It is common for them to head a public health team.
Epidemiologists are scientists who specialize in solving
health mysteries. Their work has become more important than
ever, now that previously rare and new diseases are emerg-
ing, such as Ebola virus. As human beings encroach upon the
rain forests and other important wildlife habitats, diseases are
moving from creatures of the wild to become deadly threats to
humans. In the age of airline travel, diseases have an effective
new way to spread widely and quickly throughout the world.


76 PUBLIC HEALTH
Careers in Public Health.
Where They Work
Many public health specialists are employed in hospitals,
universities, and private industry. Others work in consulting
and research.
Public health officials are employed at all levels of govern-
ment. In local communities, sanitarians and health officers
ensure that establishments handle food safely. They enforce
local regulations so that communities can stay safe and healthy.
The requirements for these positions vary from state to state.
A career sanitarian usually has some college education; health
officers must have experience and, often, an advanced degree
such as a masters in public health (MPH).
Nationally, many government agencies are involved
in public health, including the departments of Agriculture,
Commerce, Health and Human Services (including the
CDC and PHS Commissioned Corps), Labor, Peace Corps,
Transportation, and Veterans Affairs. All of the armed forces
have professionals to help maintain the health of their mem-
bers and prevent injuries.
Internationally, the opportunities to apply public health
skills are almost unlimited. Basic services such as sanitation
and clean water are unavailable to many people in the world.
The Public Health Service Commissioned Corps
employs thousands of professionals, including
dentists, pharmacists, physicians, dietitians,
veterinarians, scientists, nurses, therapists,
engineers, environmental health experts, and
health service workers (social workers, physician
assistants, optometrists, statisticians, computer
scientists, dental hygienists, and medical records
administrators, among others). Public health
professionals serve around the world in non-
governmental organizations such as the World
Health Organization, International Red Cross, Red
Crescent, UNICEF (United Nations International
Children’s Emergency Fund), Doctors Without
Borders, religious health missions, and refugee
assistance centers.


PUBLIC HEALTH 77
.Careers in Public Health
Bringing good public health measures such as education,
immunizations, and medications to communities worldwide
could greatly reduce suffering and deaths from disease.
Volunteer agencies also employ public health professionals.
The American Red Cross helps in disasters. The American Heart
Association, American Cancer Association, and American Lung
Association are a few other organizations that employ public
health professionals.
Qualifications
Public health officials often are active people who get a sense
of satisfaction from helping others or doing something worth-
while. These are important traits for a public health career
because many positions include travel and assisting people as
part of the usual routine. Most professional careers in public
health require specialized education with a college degree as a
minimum requirement. Areas of study may include chemistry,
biology, engineering, mathematics, and psychology, as well as
policy formulation, finance, economics, and marketing. Business
and law experience can be useful to a person wanting to serve
as a public health professional.
Good sources of information about the field of public
health are your merit badge counselor, school guidance coun-
selor, library, local health department, science teacher, or a
practicing public health professional. Scholarships and other
programs are available to help qualified young people enter the
field of public health.


78 PUBLIC HEALTH
Resources.
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Animal Science, Camping, Citizenship
in the Community, Citizenship in
the Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Cooking, Dentistry, Emergency
Preparedness, Environmental Science,
First Aid, Medicine, Safety, Search and
Rescue, and Soil and Water Conservation
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Altman, Linda Jacobs. Plague and
Pestilence: A History of Infectious
Disease. Enslow, 1998.
American Medical Association. Health
Care Almanac: Every Person’s Guide
to the Thoughtful and Practical
Sides of Medicine. American
Medical Association, 1998.
Friedlander, Mark P. Outbreak: Disease
Detectives at Work. Lerner, 2000.
Giblin, James Cross. When Plague
Strikes: The Black Death, Smallpox,
AIDS. HarperCollins, 1995.
Gittleman, Ann Louise. Guess What
Came to Dinner? Parasites and Your
Health. Avery, 2001.
Grant, Pamela. Water. Thameside
Press, 2000.
Marrin, Albert. Dr. Jenner and the
Speckled Monster: The Search for the
Smallpox Vaccine. Dutton, 2002.
Nardo, Don. Vaccines. Lucent, 2001.
Pickett, George E. Opportunities in
Public Health Careers. VGM Career
Horizons, 1995.
Stewart, Gail. Teens With Cancer.
Lucent, 2001.
White, Katherine. Everything You Need
to Know About AIDS and HIV.
Rosen, 2001.
Yount, Lisa. Disease Detectives. Lucent,
2001.
Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


PUBLIC HEALTH 79
.Resources
Organizations and Websites
Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
1600 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30333
Toll-free telephone: 800-311-3435
www.cdc.gov
Environmental Protection Agency
Ariel Rios Building
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20460
Telephone: 202-272-0167
www.epa.gov
National Institutes of Health
9000 Rockville Pike
Bethesda, MD 20892
Telephone: 301-496-4000
www.nih.gov
Office of Disease Prevention and
Health Promotion
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite LL100
Rockville, MD 20852
Telephone: 240-453-8280
www.health.gov
U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services
200 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20201
Telephone: 202-619-0257
www.hhs.gov
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
10903 New Hampshire Ave.
Silver Spring, MD 20993
Toll-free telephone: 888-463-6332
www.fda.gov
U.S. Public Health Service
Commissioned Corps
1101 Wootton Parkway, Suite LL100
Rockville, MD 20852
Toll-free telephone: 800-279-1605
www.usphs.gov
World Health Organization
www.who.int
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is
thankful to Dr. William C. Reeves for
his help in updating the 2014 printing
of the Public Health merit badge pam-
phlet. The BSA also thanks the follow-
ing subject experts for their assistance
with updating the 2005 edition: Eric J.
Pyle, Ph.D., Department of Education
Theory and Practice, West Virginia
University; Gerald F. Pyle, Ph.D.,
Department of Health Promotions
and Kinesiology, University of North
Carolina–Charlotte; and Richard W.
Klomp, Information Management
Team, Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention.
Thanks to the Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, for providing the informa-
tion found in the “Recommended
Immunization Schedule.”
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serv-
ing on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee and the subject experts
on the BSA Health & Safety Support
Committee for the improvements made
in updating this pamphlet.


80 PUBLIC HEALTH
Resources.
Photo and Illustration
Credits
American Red Cross, courtesy—
page 77
Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, courtesy—pages 9
and 13
National Safety Council—page 58
Josh Pederson/Monterey Bay
National Marine Sanctuary,
courtesy—page 67
Shutterstock.com—cover
(biohazard container, ©Sto;
hands, ©Kuttelvaserova
Stuchelova; ambulance,
©Cheryl Casey); pages 6
(©mimagephotography),
8 (©Mila Supinskaya), 15
(©LukaKikina), 19 (©Syda
Productions), 20 (©Luiscar74),
23 (©michaeljung), 36
(©Ralwel), 44 (©James BO
Insogna), 48 (©RTimages),
68 (sign, ©robin2; bottle
with handcuffs and glass,
©Praisaeng), and 73 (teenager,
©Alexander Raths; drug
paraphernalia, ©cappi
thompson)
USDA Agricultural Research
Service, courtesy—cover
(mosquito); pages 16 and 37
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
courtesy—page 41
USDA Agricultural Research
Service/Keith Weller,
courtesy—page 74
USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service/Lynn
Betts, courtesy—page 65
U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, courtesy—pages 49
and 60 (Boston before
and after)
Wikipedia.com, courtesy—cover
(no smoking icon); page 9
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the
property of or are protected by
the Boy Scouts of America.
BSA Risk Management—page 71
Dan Bryant—pages 24, 51, and 54
Daniel Giles—pages 26, 29, 30,
31, 32, 53, 57, 64, and 66
John McDearmon—pages 39 (tick
illustrations), 55 (dishwashing
steps), 59, and 62
Steve Seeger—page 40