ROWING
STEM-Based


ROWING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the requirements,
procedures, and techniques presented in this pamphlet and ensuring
that each Scout earning the merit badge is able to demonstrate
knowledge and skills at a level consistent with the requirements. In
addition, counselors must ensure that all applicable Scouting America
safety policies, including Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are
followed during training, practice, and review.
Counselors for the Rowing merit badge must be registered members
of Scouting America, have current training in Safety Afloat, and be
approved by the local council advancement committee. Councils with an
aquatics committee should utilize that committee to coordinate with the
advancement committee for approval of qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge and
skills indicated by the requirements, experience in teaching such skills
to youth, and experience in identifying and managing risks associated
with the activities involved. For the Rowing merit badge, appropriate
credentials include current or previous certification as Aquatics
Instructor, Scouting America, or certification from USRowing, provided
they have studied and practiced the material in the pamphlet. The
council advancement committee may approve counselors with similar
experience and training in knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.
Equipment used for earning the Rowing merit badge must be well-
maintained and appropriately sized. Some fixed-seat rowboats have been
fitted out with pin oarlocks or oarlocks that do not allow for feathering on
the recovery of the stroke. These craft are not appropriate for the Rowing
merit badge. The counselor must determine that the equipment used is
appropriate and in good working order.
35943
ISBN 978-0-8395-3404-4
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


ROWING 33
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Rowing or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


4 ROWING


ROWING 5





ROWING 7
Contents
Rowing Through History . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
First Aid and Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Boats . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Rowboat Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Mooring Procedures. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Rowing Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Rescue Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Rowing for Fun and Exercise . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Rowing Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95





ROWING 9
.Rowing Through History
Rowing Through History
Oars, as a means of propelling boats, have been used for many
centuries. People used rowing for river and coastal transporta-
tion and with sails for open-sea travel. As civilizations devel-
oped around the eastern end of the Mediterranean Sea, rowing
became competitive. The cultures with the best rowers had an
advantage in trade and military campaigns.
Until the introduction of gunpowder and cannons, soldiers
on war vessels had switched to oar power to
maneuver close enough to an enemy ship
for archers to shoot the sailors and to
ram and sink the vessels.
Archaeologists have found two funeral barges, such as the one shown here, buried in
pits at the base of the Great Pyramid near Cairo, Egypt. They are from about 3500 b.c.
These barges are one of the earliest examples of rowing.
A sketch of this style of war
vessel, a trireme, has been
found on Grecian pottery that
scientists date to 900 b.c. The
triremes had three banks of
oars on each side and used
about 200 rowers.


10 ROWING
Rowing Through History.
As navigation techniques improved and vessels no longer
had to follow the coastline to avoid getting lost, sailing ships
increased in size and the use of oars decreased. People used
rowboats to transport cargo and people between the shore and
a larger ship. Rowboats also were used as fishing vessels.
In addition, sailing ships carried rowboats of various sizes to
use for transportation when they were docked in port, for bat-
tles that took place near shore, and for pulling the ship when
the wind was calm.
Modern competitive rowing began around 1715 on the
Thames River in London, England. By the early 1800s, ama-
teur competition had become popular between Oxford and
Cambridge universities in England. In the mid-1800s, amateur
rowing competition spread to North America, where it gained
popularity at East Coast colleges.
Sliding-seat rowing began as an effort by rowers to have a
longer stroke and to use the strength of their legs. Originally,
they wore greased leather pants so that they would be able to
slide on a smooth plank. Eventually, someone invented a small
seat with rollers that followed a set of tracks in the bottom of
the boat.
The popularity of rowing competitions grew significantly
in the 1980s and 1990s. Television broadcasts of Olympic
rowing competitions have greatly increased public awareness
of the sport. Recreational rowing also grew because of the
public awareness of rowing competition and the health bene-
fits it offers.
Rowing is the
oldest college
sport in the
United States.
The Vikings used this type of boat to explore Iceland, Greenland,
and the northern coast of North America.


ROWING 11
.Rowing Through History
Sliding-seat rowing is one of the best forms of whole-body aerobic exer-
cise. The popularity of rowing machines reflects the effectiveness of the
skill as a fitness program, even on dry land.
There are more rowing opportunities than ever as schools, places of worship, and
community clubs sponsor rowing teams in increasing numbers.
Commercial outfitters use large rafts that are controlled and guided by large oars.
In the western United States, dory-style boats are used for river running and fishing.


12 ROWING
First Aid and Safety.
First Aid and Safety
Rowing, like most other sports, has its own set of precautions.
Here are some conditions that could occur while rowing and
that you should be prepared to handle.
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature falls
below the normal range. Any combination of cool weather, wet
skin or clothes, wind, exhaustion, or hunger can lead to hypo-
thermia. While shivering is one of the earliest signs of hypo-
thermia, watch for these danger signs: loss of muscle strength
and coordination, disorientation or incoherence, and pale or
bluish skin tone. In severe stages, shivering stops and the
victim falls unconscious. Anyone who shows discoloration
around the lips or cheeks should immediately be taken off the
water, thoroughly dried and dressed in dry clothing, and moved
to a warm place.
Heat exhaustion and heatstroke occur when the body can-
not keep itself cool enough. Symptoms include dizziness, faint-
ness, nausea, weakness, headache, muscle cramps, paleness,
and profuse sweating. To treat heat exhaustion, have the person
lie down in a cool, shady spot. Cool the person with a damp
cloth or a fan. Have the victim sip water. Recovery should be
rapid. If the condition worsens, get medical help. Heatstroke is
the extreme stage where dehydration (body water loss) has
caused sweating, the body’s natural cooling mechanism, to stop
and body temperature to rise to dangerous levels. The pulse is
extremely rapid and the person will be disoriented or uncon-
scious. The victim must be cooled immediately through immer-
sion or with cold packs, and the fluid level of the body must be
increased. Treat for shock and seek emergency medical help.
Sunburn is a familiar condition commonly associated with
boating. To prevent sunburn, cover up, wear a wide-brim hat,
use a waterproof sunscreen with an SPF of at least 15, and limit
your exposure time. If you begin to redden or feel discomfort,
get out of the sun.


ROWING 13
.First Aid and Safety
In rowing, blisters are most likely to occur on the hands.
Pay attention to any tender or sensitive areas (hot spots) that
indicate the start of a blister. You may be able to adjust or relax
your grip to avoid friction on the sensitive area. If not, listen
to your body and quit for the day. If you are prone to blisters,
prevent them by wearing rowing gloves. If you do get a blister,
cover and protect the area from further irritation.
Sprains and Strains
A sprain occurs when an ankle, wrist, or other joint is bent far
enough to overstretch the ligaments, the tough bands that hold
joints together. A strain occurs when muscles are overstretched,
creating tears in the muscle fibers. Minor sprains and strains
cause only mild discomfort, but more serious sprains and strains
might be temporarily disabling.
Assume that any injury to a joint also may include a bone
fracture. Have the victim take any weight off of the injured joint
and instruct the person not to use the joint. Do not try to move
or straighten an injured limb. Cover any open wounds with a
sterile dressing. Apply ice packs or cold compresses to the
affected area for no more than 20 minutes at a time. Be sure
to place a barrier such as a thin towel between the ice pack
and bare skin. Seek medical treatment if the pain is persistent
or severe.
Swimming Skill and Safety
When earning any of the aquatic merit badges, it is important
to follow safety rules and use self-discipline and judgment.
You will need to be a confident swimmer, able to handle
yourself in deep water should you capsize. In addition, you
must understand and follow the nine points of Safety Afloat.
These guidelines were developed to promote boating and
boating safety and to set standards for safe unit activity afloat.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk
and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to
just about any incident that might happen during
rowing activities.


14 ROWING
First Aid and Safety.
Scouting America Swimmer Test
All rowers must have passed the Scouting America swimmer
test. The Scouting America swimmer test demonstrates the min-
imum level of swimming ability required for safe deep-water
swimming, a necessary part of safe open-water boating.
Scouting America Swimmer Test
To qualify as a “swimmer,” you must pass the following
swimmer test. Jump feetfirst into water over your head
in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong manner
using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke,
breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl. Then swim 25 yards
using an easy resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be
completed without any stops and must include at least
one sharp turn. After completing the swim, rest by float-
ing. This qualification test should be renewed annually.
Safety Afloat
The following version of the Safety Afloat policy has been mod-
ified for this merit badge.
Qualified Supervision. All rowing activity must be supervised
by a mature and conscientious adult age 21 or older who under-
stands and knowingly accepts responsibility for the well-being
and safety of those in his or her care and who is trained in and
committed to compliance with the nine points of Scouting
America Safety Afloat. That supervisor must be skilled in the
safe operation of the rowing craft, knowledgeable in accident
prevention, and prepared for emergency situations. If the adult
with Safety Afloat training lacks the necessary boat operating
and safety skills, then he or she may serve as the supervisor
only if assisted by other adults, camp staff personnel, or profes-
sional tour guides who have the appropriate skills. Additional
leadership is provided in ratios of one trained adult, staff mem-
ber, or guide per 10 participants. At least one leader must be
trained in first aid, including CPR. Any swimming done in con-
junction with the rowing activity must be supervised in accor-
dance with Scouting America Safe Swim Defense standards. It
is strongly recommended that all units have at least one adult
or older youth member currently trained in Scouting America
Don’t Forget
Your Buddy
Whenever you
go swimming,
make sure you
have a buddy
with you. If
you go afloat,
the same rule
applies—make
sure you have a
buddy either with
you or nearby in
another boat.


ROWING 15
.First Aid and Safety
Aquatics Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety to assist in the plan-
ning and conduct of all rowing activities.
Personal Health Review. A complete health history is required
of all participants as evidence of fitness for rowing activities.
Forms for minors must be signed by a parent or legal guardian.
Participants should be asked to relate any recent incidents of
illness or injury just prior to the activity. Supervision and
protection should be adjusted to anticipate any potential risks
associated with individual health conditions. For significant
health conditions, the adult supervisor should require an
examination by a physician and consult with parent, guardian,
or caregiver for appropriate precautions.
Swimming Ability. Operation of rowing craft is generally limit-
ed to youth and adults who have completed the Scouting
America swimmer classification test. However, anyone not clas-
sified as a swimmer may operate a fixed-seat rowboat if accom-
panied by a buddy who is a swimmer.
Life Jackets. Properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard-approved life
jackets must be worn by all persons in a rowing craft. Type III
life jackets are recommended.
Buddy System. All participants in rowing are paired as
buddies who are always aware of each other’s situation and
prepared to sound an alarm and lend assistance immediately
when needed. When several craft are used on a float trip, each
boat on the water should have a “buddy boat.” All buddy pairs
must be accounted for at regular intervals during the activity
and checked off the water by the qualified supervisor at the
conclusion of the activity. Buddies either ride in the same boat
or stay near each other in single-person craft.
Skill Proficiency. Everyone in a rowing activity must have
sufficient knowledge and skill to participate safely. Passengers
should know how their movement affects boat stability and
have a basic understanding of self-rescue. Boat operators must
meet government requirements, be able to maintain control of
their craft, know how changes in the environment influence
that control, and undertake activities only that are within their
personal and group capabilities.
Participants should be instructed in basic safety procedures
prior to launch, and allowed to proceed after they have demon-
strated the ability to control the boat adequately to return to
shore at will.
Every Scout
oarsman or
oarswoman
should study and
understand the
points of the
Scouting America
Safety Afloat plan.
The complete text
can be found in
the Guide to
Safe Scouting at
scouting.org/.


16 ROWING
First Aid and Safety.
Before embarking on a float trip or excursion that covers
an extended distance or lasts longer than four hours, each
participant should receive either a minimum of three hours
training and supervised practice, or demonstrate proficiency in
maneuvering the craft effectively over a 100-yard course and
recovering from a capsize.
Planning. Proper planning is necessary to ensure a safe, enjoy-
able rowing experience. All plans should include a scheduled
itinerary, notification of appropriate parties, communication
arrangements, contingencies in case of foul weather or equip-
ment failure, and emergency response options.
• Preparation. Any rowing activity requires access to the
proper equipment and transportation of gear and participants
to the site. Determine what state and local regulations are
applicable. Get permission to use or cross private property.
Determine whether personal resources will be used or
whether outfitters will supply equipment, food, and shuttle
services. Lists of group and personal equipment and supplies
must be compiled and checked. Even short trips require
selecting a route, checking water levels, and determining
alternative pull-out locations. Changes in water level,
especially on moving water, may pose significant, variable
safety concerns. Obtain current charts and information
about the waterway and consult those who have traveled the
route recently.
• Float Plan. Complete the preparation by writing a detailed
itinerary, or float plan, noting put-in and pullout locations and
waypoints, along with the approximate time the group should
arrive at each. Travel time should be estimated generously.
• Notification. File the float plan with parents or guardians,
the local council office if traveling on running water, and
local authorities if appropriate. Assign a member of the unit
committee to alert authorities if prearranged check-ins are
overdue. Make sure everyone is promptly notified when the
trip is concluded.
• Weather. Check the weather forecast just before setting out,
and keep an alert weather eye. Anticipate changes and bring
all craft ashore when rough weather threatens. Wait at least
30 minutes before resuming activities after the last incidence
of thunder or lightning.


ROWING 17
.First Aid and Safety
• Contingencies. Planning must identify possible emergencies
and other circumstances that could force a change of plans.
Develop alternative plans for each situation.
Equipment. All rowing craft must be suitable for the activity,
be seaworthy, and float if capsized. All craft and equipment
must meet regulatory standards, be properly sized, and be in
good repair. Life jackets must be sized to the participants. Spare
equipment, repair materials, extra food and water, dry clothes,
and emergency gear must be carried and should be appropriate
for the activity. Emergency equipment such as throw bags,
signal devices, flashlights, heat sources, first-aid kits, radios,
and maps must be ready for use. All gear should be stowed to
prevent loss and water damage. For float trips with multiple
craft, the number of craft should be sufficient to carry the party
if a boat is disabled, and critical supplies should be divided
among the craft.
Discipline. Rules are effective only when followed. All
participants should know, understand, and respect the rules
and procedures for safe rowing provided by Safety Afloat
guidelines. Applicable rules should be discussed prior to the
outing and reviewed for all participants near the boarding area
just before the activity begins. People are more likely to follow
directions when they know the reasons for rules and
procedures. Consistent, impartially applied rules supported by
skill and good judgment provide stepping-stones to a safe,
enjoyable outing.
Life Jackets
Whenever you participate in any rowing activity on the water,
you must wear a U.S. Coast Guard–approved life jacket. Here
are brief descriptions of the different types of life jackets.
Recreational rowers usually wear Type III life jackets.
Type I, Offshore Life Jacket. Type I devices are designed to
turn most unconscious victims faceup. The device gives a lot of
flotation in the chest, shoulders, and upper back areas. The Type
I is not designed for recreational rowing but for passengers on
cruising vessels, such as ferries on large bodies of water.
Type II, Near-Shore Buoyant Vest. These life jackets are
designed to turn an unconscious person in the water faceup in
calm, inland waters. Shaped like a horse collar, the Type II life
jacket design places all the flotation in the front and around the
Every skill
and maneuver
discussed in
this pamphlet
must be done
while wearing
a life jacket.
Type II
Type I


18 ROWING
First Aid and Safety.
neck. While it is not as bulky as the Type I, the Type II can be
uncomfortable for longer rowing trips but is adequate for short
periods of recreational boating and instruction. Type II life jack-
ets are recommended for closer, inshore cruising and can be
used on boats of all sizes.
Type III, Flotation Aid. These devices have the same buoyancy
as Type II life jackets and are designed to keep a conscious per-
son in a vertical or slightly backward position but may not pre-
vent an unconscious person from floating facedown. The
Type III device has less turning ability than the Type II. Its
more even distribution of buoyancy makes it more comfort-
able for water activities such as flatwater rowing. The Type
III is acceptable for boats of all sizes.
Type IV, Throwable Device. Type IV
devices are ring buoys and seat
cushions with straps. They are
designed to be tossed to a
nearby person in the
water and should
never be used in
place of a wear-
able life jacket.
Before you put on a life
jacket, check that there
is a U.S. Coast Guard
approval number on it.
Type IV
Type III
Type III life jackets
are recommended
for most Scouting
aquatics activities.


ROWING 19
.First Aid and Safety
Sizing and Maintaining a Life Jacket
To be effective, a life jacket must be fitted and worn properly. Make sure
that all side straps are adjusted to fit snugly, all ties are appropriately
tied, all zippers are zipped, and all buckles are fastened. To check the fit,
perform the shoulder strap test with a partner. Stand behind your partner
and firmly pull up both shoulder straps. If you can pull the shoulder
straps up to ear level, readjust the life jacket or try a different style or size.
In calm, shallow water, test the fit of your life jacket by relaxing your body
and tilting your head back. A properly fitted and sized life jacket will keep
your chin well above water. If it does not, readjust your life jacket or try
one with a higher buoyancy rating (found on the label).
Proper care and storage of life jackets is essential. Allow your life
jacket to drip dry, and store it in a well-ventilated place away from direct
sunlight. Sunlight causes the fabric to fade and the flotation material to
weaken. Never use a life jacket as a kneeling pad or seat cushion, and
never cut or alter your life jacket. This includes gluing or sewing patches
on the fabric that covers the flotation material. Finally, do not repair tears
or holes in the material. If the fabric is ripped or if buckles are missing,
replace the life jacket.





ROWING 21
.Boats
Boats
For many years, almost all rowboats used in Scouting were fixed-
seat craft made of wood. Not surprisingly, a major part of
Scouting America rowing activity involved repair and
maintenance of these craft.
Fixed-Seat Boats
Lightweight aluminum craft with built-in flotation (blocks of
foam under the seats) are best suited and most economical for
fixed-seat rowing. Unfortunately, there is limited demand today
for fixed-seat rowing craft. Most new boats are designed for use
with an outboard motor. As a result, these boats are often
heavy and awkward for rowing.
Most of the old, classic wooden boats that remain in the Scouting
program are used only for display or maintained as collectibles. Some
have been coated in fiberglass and kept in service. Most rowboats now
available for Scouting activities are made of aluminum, fiberglass,
plastic, or other synthetic materials.
A lightweight aluminum dory skiff with two rowing positions, a stern seat, oarlocks,
and a shallow keel or bottom runners is well-suited for fixed-seat rowing.
BOW
PAINTER
BOW BREASTPLATE GUNWALE OARLOCKS TRANSOM
STERN
PAINTER
STERN
TRANSOM KNEESSTERN SEATMIDSHIP SEATBOW SEAT
BOW


22 ROWING
Boats.
Punt—a narrow, shallow, flat-
bottomed boat with identical square
ends that have a sloping overhang.
Skiff—usually a small, flat-bottomed
rowboat with straight sides, a
pointed bow, and a transom stern.
Dinghy—a small rowboat, usually
round-bottomed with transom
stern and used as a tender to a
larger craft.
Pram—a short boat with a narrow,
squared bow and a somewhat wider
transom, typically 8 feet long with a
4-foot beam and usually V-bottomed.
Dory skiff—a shallow dory with
the wide transom of a conventional
rowboat.
Dory—a deep rowboat with a narrow,
flat bottom and clinker-built sides
that flare out to a relatively wide beam
at the level of the gunwales. Dories
have a sharp bow and a narrow,
V-shaped transom.


ROWING 23
.Boats
Sliding-Seat Craft
Sliding-seat rowboats are characterized as either recreational
or competition craft. Scouting activities commonly use the
wider, generally heavier, and more stable one- or two-person
recreational rowboats. Also recommended for merit badge
instruction and practice are aluminum canoes fitted with
drop-in, sliding-seat rowing rigs. Competition boats, usually
called shells, are generally narrower, lighter in weight, sleeker
in design, less stable, and more fragile.
Shell rowing consists of either sculling or sweep
rowing. The term sculling can be confusing because
it has different meanings in sliding- and fixed-seat
rowing. In fixed-seat craft, sculling is done with one
oar. In a rowing shell, sculling refers to rowing with
two oars per rower. There are three sculling events in
competitive rowing: single, double, and quad. In sweep
rowing, each rower handles one oar.
QUAD
Sculling
DOUBLE
SINGLE


24 ROWING
Boats.
Recreational Craft
There are several types of recreational sliding-seat craft used in
Scout rowing activities. They all have several basic parts: out-
riggers or riggers with oarlocks, a sliding seat on tracks, and a
stretcher with adjustable footrests.
There are three basic sweep boats in competitive rowing:
pair, four, and eight.
PAIR
FOUR
EIGHT
STERN BOW
PORT
STRETCHER FOOTREST
RIGGER
OARLOCK
STARBOARD
SEAT ON TRACKS
COMPARTMENT


ROWING 25
.Boats
Sliding seat
Footrest
Two distinctive features of the rowing scull are the seat and the
footrest. Sliding seats usually are contoured to reduce the risk
of the seat slipping out from under the rower. The seat moves
back and forth on runners mounted securely to the floor of the
cockpit. The footrest secures the feet to a fixed position, which
lets the rower use the legs to draw forward and to push back.
The feet should be secured with hook-and-loop straps or lacing,
which will permit the feet to slip free if the boat capsizes.
Canoe with drop-in rig


26 ROWING
Boats.
Canoes with rowing rigs are especially well-suited for
Scout programs because the craft can be used in canoe-
ing and rowing programs. All you need to do to add a
drop-in unit to a canoe is remove the midship thwart
(the brace that spans the gunwales).
To adapt a canoe for tandem rowing, simply remove
the bow seat and the midship thwart and drop in two
rowing units. The unique features of the canoe as a row-
ing platform are its stability, compared with a shell, and
speed, compared with a fixed-seat craft. A flat-bottom
lake canoe works best, but the rowing unit can be fitted
to almost any canoe configuration.
A drop-in unit can be attached in place in minutes by simply
positioning the rig and finger-tightening the screw anchors
to the gunwale.


ROWING 27
.Boats
Boat Capacity
Avoid overloading or crowding a rowboat. Every boat has its
safe limits of total weight and number of people. Many boats
have a plate or sticker on the transom stating the capacity.
Do not exceed the rated capacity for the boat.
You can use the following formula to compute the maxi-
mum number of people to be carried under fair-weather con-
ditions in a fixed-seat rowboat.
Boat length is the keel measurement. The beam measure-
ment is the width of the boat at its widest point, usually near
midship from gunwale to gunwale. Depth is measured from the
bottom of the transom to the lowest point on the top edge of
the transom. If the transom is notched, measure from the bot-
tom edge of the notch.
Safe load capacities apply to passengers and equipment.
Usually, it is more reliable to use the capacity measurement in
pounds. Do not attempt to carry passengers or equipment in a
rowing shell unless it has a coxswain’s seat or a storage com-
partment. A canoe rowing rig can carry the passenger and
equipment load for which the canoe is rated.
the length of the boat (in feet)
X
the length of the beam (in feet)
15
The nearest whole number is the maximum number
of people you should carry under normal conditions.
A formula for determining the maximum
safe load in pounds is:
the length of the boat (in feet)
X
the length of the beam (in feet)
X
the depth of the boat (in feet)
X
7.5
—:


28 ROWING
Boats.
Boatbuilding Materials
Rowboats are made from a variety of materials, including
aluminum, fiberglass, plastic, wood planking, and plywood.
Aluminum. This lightweight, durable metal needs little mainte-
nance. Aluminum will not float, but all approved aluminum
boats have flotation materials in chambers that keep the boat
afloat if it capsizes or swamps.
Wood Planking. Easy to cut and drill, wood is probably the
easiest boatbuilding material to handle. It is very buoyant—
a boat made from wood planking floats even when it is full
of water. Cedar, spruce, cypress, and pine are good planking
woods. Oak and ash are good for framing. However, to
keep such craft watertight, they must be regularly caulked
and painted.
Fiberglass. Extremely strong and durable, fiberglass can be
used to coat a wooden boat. It will not rust, corrode, or dent,
requires no painting, and is available in different colors. It is
somewhat heavier than aluminum, and flotation material must
be in chambers for safety. Some boats are molded completely
from fiberglass.
Plastic. Many recreational rowing shells and some smaller,
fixed-seat craft are made of plastic. Plastic is generally light-
weight, maintenance-free, and durable. Larger craft made of
plastics, however, may lack strength and rigidity.
Plywood. Some people use kits or printed plans to build boats
from marine plywood. Plywood is light, strong, and waterproof,
and it comes in sizes large enough that the boats need only a
few seams. Like boats built of wood planking, plywood boats
must be regularly caulked and painted. They also have a ten-
dency to splinter or split at the edges.
Boat Maintenance
Boats need periodic maintenance. Maintenance tasks include
washing the boat to remove dirt and grime; checking for leaks,
loose rivets, nuts, and bolts; and looking for wear on the oar-
locks. Respect and care for equipment will minimize mainte-
nance problems.
Epoxy compounds
also can be added
to a wooden boat
as a covering.


ROWING 29
.Boats
All boats should be regularly washed and inspected for loose rivets, worn seams,
and other signs of damage or wear.
A loose oarlock interferes with rowing and can quickly damage the boat.
Check oarlocks and riggers before every use, and tighten as needed.





ROWING 31
.Rowboat Equipment
Rowboat Equipment
Standard rowboat equipment includes items such as oars,
oarlocks, gate locks, outriggers, and anchors. Learning how
to use the equipment on your boat is one of the first steps in
becoming a skilled oarsman or oarswoman.
Oars
Except for the boat itself, oars are the most important equip-
ment used in rowing. Learn to use and care for oars by first
becoming familiar with their parts:
• The handle, where the oar is gripped
• The loom, or shaft
• The throat, where the loom meets the blade
• The blade, the flattened part that pushes against the water
• The tip, the end that dips into the water
HANDLE BUTTON SLEEVE SHAFT BLADE
Sliding-seat oar
LEATHERBUTTONHANDLE LOOM THROAT BLADE TIP
Fixed-seat oar


32 ROWING
Rowboat Equipment.
Although a good oar is strong and durable, the part of
the loom that comes in contact with the oarlock will wear out
unless protected. You can add several years to the life of an oar
by covering the area where the oar rests in the oarlock with a
shield made of leather, rubber, plastic, or another synthetic.
The shield should completely encircle an 8- to 12-inch segment
of the oar. Often oars come with a shield or sleeve already
in place.
The length of the sculling oar in sliding-seat rowing is
usually 91⁄2 to 10 feet. Sweep oars usually range from 12 feet
to 12 feet, 8 inches long. Oars are manufactured in standard
lengths in these ranges. Slight variances in length are used to
accommodate the size and strength of the rower. For example,
a high school crew will use a shorter oar than an Olympic crew.
Sleeve and collar in gated oarlockOne-piece sleeve and collar
Handmade leather and button


ROWING 33
.Rowboat Equipment
The correct length of oar to use in a fixed-seat rowboat
depends on the boat’s beam (the width at the widest point)
and freeboard (the distance between the surface of the water
and the gunwales) and how the oar feels when you use it.
The weight of your oars from handle to oarlock and from oar-
lock to blade should be almost balanced, with the blade end
slightly heavier. The oar should be long enough to allow you to
take a long, sweeping stroke when the blades are in the water.
Recommended oar lengths for fixed-seat rowing are as follows.
32-inch blade (needle)
24-inch blade (Macon)
20-inch blade (spade)
Competition blade (hatchet)
Open-water blade (delta)
Blade Types
36 inches 6 feet, 6 inches
42 inches 7 feet, 6 inches
48 inches 8 feet, 6 inches
54 inches 9 feet, 6 inches
Beam Oar Length


34 ROWING
Rowboat Equipment.
The area and shape of the oar blade are important. Until
the late 1950s, blades were long and thin. They became known
as needles and remain standard equipment in fixed-seat rowing.
In the 1960s, however, a successful West German competitive
rowing crew introduced a shorter, wider design called a spade
blade. While the principle of rowing is to lever the boat past
the blade, the blade is in fact never anchored at one spot in the
water. This is because it slips as pressure is exerted. The idea
behind spade blades is to reduce this slippage by making the
blades shorter and wider. The wider the blade, the easier it is to
get a firm hold on the water. However, the oar also is heavier
and will result in greater drag.
The blades used most often today in competitive rowing
are a combination of needle and spade. The most popular
version is called a Macon because it was first used successfully
in the 1959 European championships held in Macon, France.
The Macon is slightly spoon-shaped, longer than the spade,
and wider than the needle.
Oars used in fixed-seat rowing are usually made of wood.
The sweep oars and sculling oars used in sliding-seat craft may
be made of wood, aluminum, or synthetic materials such as
plastic, fiberglass, or carbon graphite. Sliding-seat oars usually
are hollow to reduce weight and are flattened on one side. The
flat side is positioned against the side of the lock when the oar
is being pulled. This shape also makes the oar more rigid.
Competitive oars
today also have
curved blades
to form a cup
in the water.
The greater the
curvature, the less
the slippage and
the stronger the
stroke. If the blade
is curved too
much, however,
it is difficult to
handle at the
end of the stroke.
The Macon Blade
81
⁄4"
33
⁄8"
24"
7"


ROWING 35
.Rowboat Equipment
Oarlocks
The oarlock serves as a pivot point, or fulcrum, for the oar.
It holds the oar in place. The earliest oarlocks were made of
wood. By the early 1900s, dozens of types of metal oarlocks
were in use. Today the choice of oarlocks is limited. The Davis,
the open, and the ring are recommended for fixed-seat rowing
because each of these swivels, allows feathering (placing the
blade in a flat position, parallel to the water, before and during
the recovery part of the rowing cycle), and can be lowered
when not in use.
The Davis oarlock is self-contained. It is made out of
bronze or galvanized iron. Flat, side, and angle sockets are
available for the open and ring oarlocks. The locks should
be secured with a lanyard or chain long enough for them to
be lowered.
Davis (rowing position) Davis (safety position)
Open Ring


36 ROWING
Rowboat Equipment.
Outrigger and Gate Lock
Sliding-seat craft usually have gate
locks on outriggers. The gate lock has
a bar that closes the open part of the
lock when the oar is in place. The
gate bar is held in place by a lock
nut. As the boat hull was narrowed
for speed and weight reduction in
competitive rowing, boat designers
recognized that the fulcrum point
needed to be maintained at some
distance beyond the boat gunwale.
Outriggers, or riggers, were developed
for this purpose. The side of the lock
on which the oar pushes during the
stroke is squared off to match the
flattened side of the oar loom.
Sculling Lock
Some fixed-seat rowboats use a transom-mounted sculling lock
or notch. You can buy a portable metal notch from boat suppli-
ers, mount an extra oarlock on the transom, or you can make a
portable notch by mounting a standard oarlock on a small wood
block and mounting it on the transom with two C-clamps.
Because the rower sits or stands in
the center of the boat over the keel
when sculling across the transom,
the sculling notch should be set
slightly off center to either side,
depending on which hand the rower
is using on the oar.
An advantage of the portable
sculling lock is that it can be placed
on either side of the transom or
anywhere else along the gunwale.
The sculling lock may have a
small chain and hook that can be
attached to the boat to prevent the
lock from being lost overboard
during mounting or unmounting.
Outrigger on canoe
Gate lock Oar in place


ROWING 37
.Rowboat Equipment
Sculling lock


38 ROWING
Mooring Procedures.
Mooring Procedures
When your fixed-seat rowboat is not being used, it should be
moored or secured to a dock, pier, or landing to prevent drift;
damage by wind, wave, or tidal movement; damage to other
craft; or interference with traffic on the water or at the mooring.
Moor rowing craft on the sheltered side
of a pier with lines securing both the bow and the stern.
Mooring lines should space the craft
to avoid bumping and scraping. The
best arrangement usually is securing
the stern at the pier with the bow
tied out so that the boat is suspended
on the water, free of any contact.
Always be sure that lines are secured
so the boat will remain safely moored
even if wind or current changes.
Never leave an unattended boat
secured with only one line. Three-
eighths-inch stranded line should
be eye spliced to the boat with the
mooring end back spliced.
If the pier edge is properly cushioned to avoid damage,
a rowboat can be secured safely alongside a pier with one
gunwale against the protected edge of the pier. Bow and stern
lines should be tight enough to prevent wind and waves from
bouncing the boat against the pier.
Lower or remove oarlocks when the boat is moored. Secure
all loose gear or remove it from the boat. Hang oars vertically
to prevent bowing or warping the shaft. Avoid standing them
on their tips or handles. It is easy to construct a permanent or
improvised hanging rack, but if there is no place to hang your
oars, it is best to lay them on a flat protected surface.
A2
A3
Recommended pier mooring


ROWING 39
.Mooring Procedures
Mooring Knots
Several knots and hitches are useful in mooring your boat.
The clove hitch, bowline, and roundturn with half-hitches are
often used. For ease of release, the slippery clove, mooring
hitch, and Wellman’s knot are recommended.
In tidal water,
mooring should
permit the boat to
rise and fall safely
with the tide.
Do not leave the
boat hanging or
grounded at low
tide. During high
tide, it should not
be stressed by the
mooring lines.
Unless safe and secure mooring on the water is
impossible or impractical, do not haul heavy fixed-seat
rowboats out of the water except for maintenance,
cleaning, or seasonal storage. Outhauling stresses the
craft and will shorten the useful life of the equipment.
Dragging heavy craft onto the bank or dock will damage
the boat’s hull.
On the other hand, rowing shells, sculling craft,
and canoes with drop-in units should be removed from
the water when not in use. Store them upside down on
racks where they are protected from sun, wind, and
water. If shells are stored suspended on racks or in
slings, be sure there is adequate support to prevent
bowing or sagging.
Mooring hitch
Slippery clove
Roundturn and
two half hitches
Painter splice
Wellman’s knot
PULL
PULL
HOLD AND PULL
TO SECURE.





ROWING 41
.Rowing Skills
Rowing Skills
Whether you are rowing in a fixed-seat craft or a sliding-seat
craft or are rowing solo or tandem, there are a number of basic
skills and maneuvers you will need to practice and master.
Among these skills are boarding and launching, the rowing
stroke, backing water, pivoting and turning, sculling, stopping,
and landing.
Fixed-Seat Tandem Rowing
Launching
If your fixed-seat rowboat is moored at a pier with the bow out,
as recommended, a tandem launch is a simple matter of team-
work. Place oars and other gear in the boat over the transom
from the dock before boarding.
After the gear is in place, untie
the stern line (1). If you step into
the boat over the transom while
the stern line is tied, you stress the
stern line and may damage the
boat, pier, or line. The passenger
should hold the end of the slack
stern line while steadying the boat,
either by kneeling on the pier and
holding the transom with the
hands or by sitting on the pier with
the feet over the transom. If seated,
the passenger should pull up on
the transom with one or both hands
while resting the feet on the transom seat. This will prevent the
boat from rocking sharply if the person boarding gets off balance.
1


42 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
When the boat is steady, you,
as rower, should step into the cen-
ter of the boat from a sitting posi-
tion on the pier and move forward
to the bow seat, keeping low and
over the keel (2). When you are
settled at or forward of the bow
seat, facing the bow, your passen-
ger should push the boat out while
continuing to hold the stern line, so
that you can untie the bowline (3).
After you have untied the bowline
and brought it into the boat, you
should move to the rowing posi-
tion. If the water is unobstructed on
both sides of the boat, you can set
the oars out in the hold-water posi-
tion to steady the boat. If oars can-
not be used, then you should sit
directly over the keel with a hand
on each gunwale for maximum sta-
bility. When ready, tell the passen-
ger to come aboard.
With the stern line, the passenger
should pull the transom back to the pier and step into the boat
from a sitting position on the pier. Immediately after boarding,
the passenger should sit down in the center of the transom seat.
If the passenger gets off balance or fails to keep centered while
boarding, you should counterbalance by quickly shifting in the
opposite direction.
When the passenger is settled and the stern line has been
brought aboard, you are ready to row. If the mooring does not
permit a rowing start, the passenger should push off gently
against the dock. You should put out the oars when the boat is
clear of the mooring.
If your boat is moored alongside the pier and there are no
obstacles on the opposite side of the boat, you can board easily
over the transom after repositioning the boat. First, untie the
bow painter. Then, push the bow out and pull the transom
back to the pier. With the boat in this position, the boarding
procedure is the same as when moored bow out, except that
there is no need to go forward to release the bowline.
2
3


ROWING 43
.Rowing Skills
If your boat is moored along-
side the pier and the water is
obstructed so that the boat cannot
be swung bow out, you can board
over the gunwale against the pier.
Untie both bow and stern lines
before beginning the boarding pro-
cedure. The passenger should kneel
or sit on the pier with his or her feet
over the gunwale near the transom
(1). You should sit on the pier with
your feet over the gunwale next to
the rowing position. The passenger,
while holding the stern painter to
prevent drifting, should lean down
and hold the gunwale to steady the
boat. You should then step into the
boat, and, keeping low, settle into the
rowing position (2).
After you are settled and can
steady the boat with one hand on
the pier, the passenger should step
in from a sitting position and settle
into position on the transom seat.
You can help by holding the passen-
ger’s hand or wrist for balance
while boarding (3).
1
2
3


44 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
The boat can then be moved along the pier by hand or
paddled to open water where you can use the oars (4).
If your boat is sitting high and dry on the beach, you and
your partner should stand on opposite sides, face each other,
grasp the gunwales at midship, lift, and turn the boat so that
the bow is toward the water. Walk sideways, being careful of
your footing, until the bow can be set on the water.
If the beach has a gradual slope, walk out into the water
until both bow and stern are floating. If the water is not suit-
able for wading, stop at the water’s edge, put the bow on the
water, and pass the boat out hand-over-hand along the gun-
wales until the stern can be set on the water. While one person
holds the boat, the other should load the gear. (If the gear is
not heavy, it can be loaded before the boat is lifted from the
beach.) If the water is shallow, walk the boat out before board-
ing to avoid grounding when you step in.
As the rower, you should enter first over the transom while
the passenger steadies the boat. Keeping your weight low and
centered, go to the rowing position and prepare to begin row-
ing. Then, steady the boat so the passenger can step in over the
transom and settle into position on the transom seat.
Another maneuver for getting under way from along- side a pier is to
backwater, that is, row in reverse, with the outside oar, causing the boat to
pivot on the corner of the transom against the pier. The bow will swing
out as the transom rotates toward the pier. When the transom is flat
against the pier, put out the other oar and begin rowing. This maneuver
works only when the transom corner can press against the pier edge and
serve as a pivot point and when there is room to swing the bow out in a
wide arc.
4


ROWING 45
.Rowing Skills
Balance and Trim
For efficient and safe rowing, the boat should be trim
and balanced on the water. If the boat is balanced, the
port (left) and starboard (right) gunwales are the same
distance above the water. This balance reduces the
chance of tipping and spilling. For power and control,
it also is important that the oars have the same angle
and depth when rowing. If one oarlock is higher than
the other because the boat is not in balance, rowing
will be awkward and inefficient.
Trim refers to the way the boat rides on the water
lengthwise. The bow should be slightly higher than the
stern. If the one at the oars rows from the forward
position while carrying a passenger of approximately
the same weight, the boat should be in trim. If the bow
is low, increased drag will cause the boat to yaw, or
deviate from its intended course, which results in more
difficult, slower rowing. If the bow is high, the boat is
not stable and wind resistance is more troublesome.
Correctly trimmed boat with single rower


46 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
The Rowing Stroke
To prepare to row, place the oars in the oarlocks with the length
inboard and outboard adjusted so that the handle ends almost
touch each other as they pass at the nearest point. You will get
more power in your stroke and will not tire as quickly if the oar
handles at the midpoint of the stroke are as near as possible to
the centerline of both the boat and your body. This enables you
to use your body weight and trunk muscles, rather than just
your arms, in the power portion of the stroke.
Check your hand position by holding the oars in line
just in front of you with the blades perpendicular to the water
surface. The backs of your hands should be level. This level
position should be maintained through the first part of your
stroke. Hand position is essential for control of the blade
angle and for feathering.
Correctly trimmed boat with rower and passenger
Correctly trimmed boat with rower and two passengers


ROWING 47
.Rowing Skills
For the catch and pull
(figure A), the hands
and wrists stay aligned
in a level plane almost
perpendicular to the
blade angle of the oar.
For the feather and
recover (figure B), the
wrists angle sharply
down with hands up to
turn and hold the oar
blade parallel to the
surface of the water.
The line on the oar grip
in the illustrations indi-
cates the blade angle.
A
To determine the proper depth for your stroke, let
the oar rest in the oarlock with the blade floating
perpendicular in the water. The waterline on the
blade in this at-rest position shows how much of
the blade should be submerged when rowing.
B


48 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
Catch. Sit with your back straight on the seat and grip both
handles firmly, brace your feet about a shoulder width apart for
power and balance, and keep your palms down. Bend at the
waist and extend each handle an arm’s length toward the stern.
Your eyes should be straight ahead, and your wrists should be
in a straight line with your arms. Raise the handles so that the
blades enter the water almost vertically with the top edge
angled slightly forward. This slight angle adds a little down-
ward pressure to help keep the oar in the lock.
Pull. Begin by exerting a steady pull on the oars. Keep your
arms extended during most of the stroke and bring the muscles
of your back and legs into play with the weight of your body by
pivoting from the hips. At the point where you are leaning back
just beyond the vertical, complete the pull by bending your
arms quickly, keeping your elbows in near your body. This final
snap should pull your body erect.
1. Catch—raising the handle of the oar so that the blade enters the water edgewise.
Catch
2. Pull—exertion on the oar causing
the blade to sweep through the water.
Pull
There are four parts to the complete rowing
stroke: catch, pull, feather, and recover.
By keeping your
elbows near your
body, you get
more power for
less effort and
avoid lifting the
oars from the
locks at the end
of the pull.


ROWING 49
.Rowing Skills
Feather. To feather the oar, simply drop the wrists, causing the
blade to turn parallel to the surface of the water as it leaves the
water. Do not shift or let your grip slip on the oar handles. You
should feather immediately at the end of the pull.
Recover. You are now ready to recover to the catch position for
the next stroke. Keeping the blade feathered, straighten your
arms and lean forward to the catch position. Then roll your
wrists up level to place the oar blade in a near-vertical position.
This completes the rowing stroke.
3. Feather—started before and used during the recovery part
of the rowing stroke, it is the act of placing the blade in a
flat position, parallel to the water.
Feather
Recover
4. Recover—withdrawing the blade from the water and
assuming the original position.


50 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
A common beginner recovery error is to drop the hands
below the knees, thus raising the blades high in the air. To start
the next stroke you then have to lift your hands too high, forc-
ing the oars too deep into the water. Rowing this way is clumsy
and tiring, and it slows the speed of the boat. This “windmill-
ing” also makes it difficult to keep the oar in the lock because
raising your hands above the gunwales lifts the oar up rather
than pulling it back against the side of the lock. Also, when the
blade is dropped back to the water from a high position, the
oar has a tendency to bounce out of the lock.
During the recovery, be careful to keep the feathered
blades parallel to the water or tilted slightly up toward the bow
and far enough above the water to avoid “catching a crab.”
This expression means allowing the forward (toward the bow)
edge of your blade to tilt downward, while at the same time let-
ting the recovery stroke dip too low, so that one or both oars
dig into the water. The blade is thrust sharply downward, aided
by the forward motion of the boat, driving the handle toward
your chest in such a way that you might actually be knocked
from your seat. If you do catch a crab while recovering, quickly
roll your wrists up to raise the blade angle and the blade of the
oar will plane back to the surface.
To avoid the more common rowing errors, remember the following:
• Avoid dipping the blade too deeply into the water.
• Keep your elbows close to your rib cage as you end the pull.
• Keep your hands at the same height.
• Keep your head level at all times.
• Pause briefly at the end of the recovery before the next catch.
Rather than windmilling, move your hands back and forth as though
in a groove. Keep them at almost the same height through the stroke.
This way, the muscles do less work, the boat goes faster, the oars stay
in the locks, and the rowing is smoother and more efficient.


ROWING 51
.Rowing Skills
If you need to stop your craft from moving forward,
dip both oars straight out from the locks and hold them firmly
against the force of the water. This is called the hold-water
position. Maintaining this position will reduce drift when the
boat is stationary. For an even quicker stop, push forward on
the oar handles from the hold-water position.
The easiest way to hold a straight course when rowing is to look over
your shoulder and point the bow of your boat in the exact direction in
which you wish to go. Then, looking over the center of the stern, pick out
a fixed point on the shore that is in line with the stern. As you row, keep
the object on the shore lined up with the stern, and look over the bow
occasionally to see that your way is clear.


52 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
If you need to alter or adjust your heading (direction),
pull harder on the oar on the outside of the turn. For example,
if you want to turn to the right, or starboard, pull harder with
your right hand. If you need to turn sharply, pull hard on the
oar on the outside of the turn and either let the oar on the
inside of the turn drag or hold it straight out from the oarlock.
An easy way for the coxswain to indicate direction is
to put the palms together over the keel of the boat with the
fingertips pointed in the direction the boat should be headed.
When the coxswain’s hands are pointed squarely at the rower,
the boat is on course. The rower is thus able to watch the hand
position of the coxswain and easily make course adjustments.
If you have a passenger riding in the stern, the passen-
ger can serve as coxswain. The customary way for the
coxswain to give signals is to make the following calls:
• Prepare to give way tells the rower to make ready
to catch.
• Give way tells the rower to begin rowing.
• Hold water and stop both mean the rower should
stop the boat.
Straight course with coxswain


ROWING 53
.Rowing Skills
Backing Water
When you wish to make sternway (go backward) rather than
headway (go forward), simply reverse the rowing stroke. Push
instead of pull. This stroke is called backing water.
A rower may backwater when approaching the mooring.
This procedure also is used for rescues and is a convenient way
to approach the dock to pick up a passenger. You should back-
water whenever you want to keep what you are approaching
in sight.
Basically, the push stroke is the opposite of the pull
stroke. You make the catch with your body arched back, your
thumbs against your chest, and your elbows close to your body.
To help maintain balance, brace one leg under or against the
seat. To make the catch, raise your hands slightly, thrust your
body toward the stern of the boat, bending at your hips, and
extend your arms full length to complete the stroke. At the
completion of the push, feather the oars by rolling the wrists
up with the knuckles down, bringing the blades flat with the
water and fairly close to the surface as your body swings back
to begin another stroke.
To stop when backing water, dip the blades at the hold-
water position and pull as needed. Turning when backing
water is similar to rowing forward—push harder on the oar
on the outside of the turn and drag the other oar as needed.
Maintaining your course when backing water is easy. Simply
point the center of the transom at your landmark and sustain
that course.
Backing water—catch


54 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
Backing water—recovery
Backing water—push
Backing water—end of push with
arms extended
Backing water—feathering


ROWING 55
.Rowing Skills
Pivoting
To reverse direction as quickly as possible or to reverse while
sitting stationary, you pivot. To pivot, backwater with one oar
while doing a forward stroke with the other. When the maneu-
ver is done correctly, the center pivotal point of the boat is
practically motionless. Each oar catches at the same time, with
the rower pushing and pulling in unison, finishing the strokes
together. The oars are feathered and recovered at the same time
to the original catch positions.
If you are pivoting to starboard, the starboard oar backs
water while the port oar rows forward. If you want to do a port
pivot, the port oar backs water while the starboard oar rows
forward. Remember, for a starboard pivot, the right hand pulls
(does a forward stroke); for a port pivot, the left hand pulls.
Pivot—push-pull
Pivot—feathering
Pivoting is an
important skill
in emergency
situations when
you need to make
a quick reverse
to approach stern
first. A pivot
also is used
when coming
alongside a pier
or another boat.
Pivot—catch
1
2
3


56 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
Sculling
Sculling lets you move and maneuver a fixed-seat rowboat with
a single oar. Sculling also allows you to move and maneuver
the boat while keeping one hand free for other things, such as
fishing. This skill also is useful if it is necessary to maneuver
your boat through a narrow or crowded waterway.
You can scull from a seated position using the oarlock on
either side of your boat, or over the transom from a seated or
standing position. A transom sculling notch or sculling lock
helps hold the oar in place when sculling over the transom.
Sculling from your usual rowing position will move the
boat sideways. If you want to move your boat sideways to port,
scull with the oar on the starboard side. To move the boat to
starboard, scull with the port oar.
For sculling over the transom, begin by practicing in a sit-
ting or kneeling position. This keeps you low and more stable
while you practice the sculling stroke. When you have a feel for
the basic motion, practice in the standing position. Sculling
while standing is less awkward because the oar has a sharper
angle to the water and your arm can move in a plane at or just
Sculling over the side
Another advantage of sculling from a standing
position: You can look ahead and about in a crowded
or narrow waterway.


ROWING 57
.Rowing Skills
Sculling
1 2 3
4 5 6
WATERLINE
WATERLINE


58 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
below shoulder level. The angle of the oar when sculling while
standing gives more forward power.
To scull while standing, stand with your weight directly
over the keel in the compartment or space between the transom
and midship seats. Stand flat on the bottom of the boat with
one foot on either side of the keel, but angle your body slightly
to one side so that you can maneuver the oar over the transom
while looking ahead. In general, you should stand diagonally
across the centerline of the craft, facing the bow.
It helps to position your sculling notch off center on the
transom toward the side your toes are pointing. Place the oar in
the sculling lock and hold the handle with the hand nearest the
stern. The oar should be held at about a 45-degree angle to the
surface of the water with the blade submerged to the throat.
Begin the sculling motion with the blade directly astern, the tip
flat and parallel to the surface. Hold the oar with your wrist
level and your elbow dropped naturally.
To begin sculling, drop your wrist and push your arm until
it is extended full length in a line parallel with the transom.
When your wrist is dropped, the blade turns from its flat
position. As you extend your arm, the blade cuts through the
water at an angle. The angle of the blade creates downward
pressure on the blade, which you will feel as upward pressure
on your hand. By holding your hand firm and level, this pres-
sure on the transom pushes the boat forward.
At the end of the thrust, raise your wrist to reverse the
blade angle for the pull. The same side of the blade exerts
pressure on the water on both the push and the pull portions
of the stroke. After you have raised your wrist and angled the
blade properly, pull back toward your shoulder as far as you
can without feeling awkward or forcing yourself off balance.
Keep your elbow low as you pull to move the oar handle
in a straight line. The sculling stroke moves back and forth
smoothly without pausing at either end of the stroke. Both
your hand and the blade move back and forth in a straight line
with no movement up or down. The only hand movement is at
the end of the push or pull when the blade angle is shifted.
Practice sculling over the edge of the dock or on a practice
board. If you have trouble with the blade motion, your instruc-
tor can stand in the water and guide the blade through the


ROWING 59
.Rowing Skills
stroke by holding the blade tip while you hold the handle. You
also could try using an oar with a mark on one side of the
blade. Mark the side that exerts pressure on the water. As you
practice, the mark should always be up and visible through the
stroke.
Once you have learned the basic movement of the hand,
practice without looking at the blade. Keep your eyes ahead
and be confident that the blade is reacting correctly to the
movement of your wrist. As in feathering, do not shift or let
your grip slip on the handle while sculling.
To turn while sculling, push or pull harder, depending on
the direction of the turn. To make a sharp turn, pull or push
hard and then recover for another stroke by feathering through
the water. Feather through the water by keeping the blade angle
parallel with the surface of the water and slicing back to begin
another push or pull.
For example, if you are sculling in a standing position with
your toes angled toward the port side of the boat and you want
to make a sharp turn to port, pull hard on that portion of the
sculling stroke. Feather through the water on the push, and
Sculling practice board
PORTABLE SCULLING LOCKS
SCULLING NOTCH
8' X 2" X 6"
PRESSURE-TREATED PINE
SAWHORSE LEGS
2" X 4" PRESSURE-
TREATED PINE
Sculling has been used for years on the Chesapeake Bay
by hunters in “sneak boats,” moving from downwind to a
flock of ducks. Hunters scull with a hand over their chests
as they lie on their backs looking forward across the bow.
Remember that
the leading edge
of the blade as it
moves through the
water is always
down.


60 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
then pull hard again. Repeat this process until you have com-
pleted your turn. If you want to turn to starboard from the
same position, push hard and feather through the pull portion
of the stroke.
To stop your boat when sculling, shift your hand on the oar
so that you can hold it firmly against the transom, with the blade
angle parallel to the line of the transom. Then raise the handle of
the oar so that the blade pushes down and forward on the water
just in back of the transom. If you are stopping suddenly, you
might want to drop to a seated position and reverse scull.
Reverse Sculling
Reverse sculling moves the boat toward the side from which you
are sculling. If you reverse scull over the transom, the boat
moves backward. The principle is the same as in sculling, but
in reverse sculling the underside of the blade exerts pressure on
the water.
To reverse scull over the gunwale, sit on the center seat
and place one hand at or just above the throat to hold the oar
down against the water. Your upper hand should be at or
below the handle, depending on
what is comfortable for you. The
movement through the water is
the same as sculling, except you
reverse your wrist action so that
as the leading edge of the blade
moves through the water it is
angled up. This creates upward
pressure on the blade and pulls
the boat toward the blade. To
extend your reach out from the
boat, turn the blade perpendicular
to the gunwale and slice or feath-
er through the water, then resume
reverse sculling.
Reverse sculling over the transom
Pull with bottom of blade against water.
When you have mastered the basic sculling technique,
you will find that you can shorten the length of the
sculling stroke to increase your forward speed and
control. The shorter the stroke, the less the boat tends
to zigzag when you are sculling.


ROWING 61
.Rowing Skills
Reverse sculling can be done from any position in the boat
where the oar can be placed over the side. You will discover
that you can scull simply by reversing the angle of the blade
during the stroke. Reverse sculling takes more effort and is con-
siderably slower than sculling forward in the standing position.
Changing Positions
Communication and coordination are important when the
rower and passenger change positions.
The Rules
• Only one person moves
at a time.
• The boat must remain
trimmed (balanced).
• The person who is
moving must stay low,
maintaining three points of
contact with the boat.
The Steps
The rower should prepare
for the change by holding
water. When the boat is
stopped, bring in the oars
and put down the oarlocks
(1). On signal, both shift
their weight to opposite
sides of the boat. This
maintains the balance of
the boat while getting both
of position to move (2).
While the rower holds the boat steady (3), the passenger
moves forward to sit next to the rower (4). The rower then
moves aft to a position at the stern (5).
When the rower reaches the transom seat, they sit, also
keeping their weight shifted to the side. When both are seated
and the boat is steady, both shift to positions over the keel (6).
Because reverse sculling tends to force the oar up, you
cannot reverse scull using only one hand in an open-
top lock. Reverse sculling also is very difficult to do in
a standing position.
FPO
1
3
5
2
4
6


62 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
Pier Landings
If you are going to make a pier landing at a mooring where
the boat is to be moored bow out, as recommended, row to a
position near the pier and pivot. Backwater slowly into your
mooring position until the stern is at or very near the pier.
The passenger on the transom seat, holding the stern painter,
should then make contact with the dock, get out, and either
sit or kneel and hold the transom to steady the boat.
After bringing in the oars and lowering the locks, you
should turn and, keeping low and balanced, move toward the
bow and pick up the bow painter. The person on the dock
should then gently push the boat out, holding the stern painter,
so that you can reach the tieline and secure the bow painter.


ROWING 63
.Rowing Skills
When the bow is secured, the person on the dock should
pull the stern of the boat back to the dock and hold it steady
while you hand out the oars and other gear. Keep all gear safely
out of the way on the dock until the mooring is completed.
When you are ready to step onto the dock, the person on the
dock should steady the boat. Then secure the stern painter to
the pier so that both stern and bow painters are taut and the
boat is suspended between the bow tieline and the pier. Clear
the dock of all gear and equipment and store it properly.
If you are going to make a pier landing by coming along-
side the dock with the gunwale parallel to the edge of the pier,
row at an angle toward the pier at the point where you want to
land. Approach at approximately a 45-degree angle. The boat
should have sufficient momentum to glide sideways to the pier
after a partial pivot. When the bow is approximately one-half of
a full boat length from the edge of the pier, you should pivot,
swinging the bow into the wind or current and bringing in the
oar on the pier side. If the pivot is executed precisely, the boat
will have enough momentum to
glide gently sideways up to the
pier, where you can grab the pier.
If the boat is about to stop short
of the pier or is beginning to drift
out of parallel, pull, push, or
scull as needed with the oar still
in the water.
If you are landing to let a
passenger get out or for some
other purpose while you remain
in the boat, the oar away from
the pier can be kept in the water
to steady the craft and help hold
the position at the pier. If you
are mooring the boat, you should
bring in the other oar. You and
the passenger can get out of the
boat by reversing the procedure
used to board from alongside
the pier.


64 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
Shore Landings
You can land a rowboat on shore, either bow first or stern first.
If the water’s edge is rough and rocky or if there is a sharp drop
at the edge of the water, in most cases it is better to go in stern
first. If landing bow first, row slowly toward the shore until the
boat just touches the shore or the bottom in shallow water.
Remember that wind or waves can drive the boat forward.
You might need to hold back to prevent damage to the boat.
A sudden lurch also could throw you or your passenger off
balance and cause injury.
When the boat has touched shore,
bring in the oars, drop the oarlocks, and
step over the edge at midship into shal-
low water. Be sure of the water’s depth
before you step over. Keep your weight
low and step over one foot at a time,
carefully holding onto the gunwales.
The passenger should help steady the
boat by shifting his or her weight to
counterbalance your weight. After you
step out, the boat will ride a bit higher
in the water. You can walk the boat
slightly more toward shore and then
steady it while the passenger steps out
from approximately midship. If you are
going to leave the boat, lift it from the
water or tie it securely. Be sure you do
not leave the boat where it can be dam-
aged by wind or wave action or where
it might drift free.
If you are going to make a stern-first
landing on the shore, row to the shore
until you are about a boat length out.
Then pivot and backwater slowly until
you make shore contact. Hold the boat
steady with the oars while the stern-seat
passenger gets out over the transom.
Then bring in the oars, put down the
oarlocks, and move carefully to the stern
of the boat while it is steadied by the
person on shore. After you step out
over the transom, secure the boat.


ROWING 65
.Rowing Skills
Assisting Passengers
When you take passengers on board, you must tell them specif-
ically what you want them to do. As the rower, you should be
aboard first, seated on the forward seat and holding the boat
against the landing or pier. Ask the passenger to step aboard
midship as near the center of the boat as possible and tell the
person where to sit to maintain trim and balance. If the pier is
higher than the gunwale of the boat, have the passenger sit on
the pier with his or her feet over the gunwale and then step
down into the boat from this position. If a boarding passenger
needs more help to stay balanced, have the person step in just
ahead of your seated position while you hold the arm or hand
closest to you. Maintain dock contact with your other hand.
To unload a passenger, bring the boat alongside the pier.
Remain seated while holding onto the pier, and ask the passen-
ger to step ashore from midship. You can offer a hand to help
the person stay steady.
An alternative boarding procedure is to hold the stern of
the boat against the pier by backing water while the passenger
boards over the transom from a seated position on the dock.
As the one at the oars, you should be in the forward rowing
position. Reverse the process to let a passenger get out. While
you hold the stern against the dock by backing water, the pas-
senger should get up from the transom seat and sit on the dock.
The over-transom
method does not
let you steady the
boat against the
dock or lend a
helping hand, so
use it only when
the water is calm
and you have
an experienced
passenger.


66 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
Fixed-Seat Single Rowing
The strokes and maneuvers of rowing alone are the same as
rowing with a passenger, except that you sit on the midship
seat to maintain trim.
Launching and Landing
When doing a single-person launch from a mooring where the
bow is tied out, it is a good idea to ask another boater for help.
The person assisting will play the role of the passenger, except
that instead of getting in when you are ready, he or she will
give you a gentle push off.
If no one is available to help out, begin by loading your
gear into the boat, then untying the stern painter. Sit on the
dock and ease in over the transom while being careful to not
lose your balance. Move forward to the bow and untie the bow
painter. When the boat is free and you have pulled the painters
into the boat, take your rowing position and move the boat
away from the pier. If there is not enough space for you to row
out, use one oar over the stern or at the bow to scull or paddle
yourself clear of obstacles, then begin rowing.
If your boat is moored with one side against a dock or pier,
the procedures for getting under way are generally the same as
when you have a passenger, except that you might not have
any help. Push off or backwater to turn the bow out if there is
enough open water. Otherwise, move along the pier by hand or
hand paddle to open water where you can use your oars.
The single-person landing procedure is simply the reverse
of the launch. Remember to tie the bow first and then scull or
paddle the stern to the dock. Leave enough slack when you tie
the bow rope so you can get to the dock.
A single-person landing or launch from shore is the same
with or without a passenger, except that after rowing to the
shore and bringing in your oars, you will have to move fore or
aft or step over the edge with no one to help steady the boat.
You will not have anyone to give you a push off after you are in
position either. This means the boat might drift slightly after
you have boarded and while you are preparing to row. A good
way to avoid such problems is to scull or paddle the boat away
from any obstacles before you take your rowing position.


ROWING 67
.Rowing Skills
Single and Tandem Sliding-Seat Rowing
Merit badge requirements and sliding-seat rowing activities
in Scouting reflect the practicality of single and tandem recre-
ational rowing as well as the popularity of competitive crew
rowing. You can meet some of the merit badge requirements
as part of a competitive rowing team, but you will need to
use a single or tandem craft to complete most. The following
discussion focuses on single and tandem sliding-seat rowboats.
Launching
It is best to launch and board a rowing shell from shallow
water. You will need a partner. Together lift at the bow and
stern and walk carefully into the shallow water. Place the boat
parallel to the shore in water with a depth between your knees
and thighs. Point the bow away from shore. You can position
seats, footrests, and outriggers while the boat is sitting near
the water’s edge, or they can be positioned after the boat is on
the water. Set oars in the locks after the boat is on the water.
When all equipment is in place, you are ready to board.
Stand close to the side of the boat, in line with the seat
and facing the shore. Position the oars so they are straight out
from the boat on each side with the blades lying on the water
in the feathered position. The oars will stabilize the boat.
When you hold the handles together over the center of the
boat, the oars act as outriggers, and it is virtually impossible
to capsize the boat.
When you are alone in a boat, any movement fore
or aft or stepping in or stepping out, will push your
boat in the opposite direction of your movement.
For example, if you backwater up to a pier until your
stern is touching, then bring in your oars and move
from the midship seat to the transom seat, the boat will
move out from the pier. If you anticipate this, you can
bring in your oars while you still have some momentum
toward the dock. Your movement in the boat will then
counteract and slow your movement into the dock
enough that you can make easy hand contact.


68 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
With the hand closest to the boat, grasp the handles of
both oars so that they are locked together. Raise the leg nearest
the boat and place your foot squarely in the center of the boat
just ahead of the seat runners (1). Then put your weight on the
foot that is in the boat so that you can lift yourself up over the
side. Sit down quickly on the seat (2). If you keep a firm grip
on the oar handles, the boat will not tip. The last leg to come
into the boat should be extended immediately against the foot
brace. Don’t worry at this point about trying to slip your foot
into the straps. Extend the other leg and place it against the foot
brace.
Take a moment to get settled and feel how the boat bal-
ances. You can rock the boat side to side by gently seesawing
the oar handles. Scoot your seat all the way forward into a tuck
position with the oar handles between your chest and knees.
Then reach over the oars with both arms and hold the oar han-
dles under your arms with the handle tips together against your
chest and just beneath your chin. This allows you to keep the
oars in position to prevent tipping while you reach across to
secure your foot straps (3).
1 2


ROWING 69
.Rowing Skills
With your feet securely in place (4), extend your legs and
grip the oar handles with your hands. The oar handles should
overlap so that the left hand is over the right (5). Rotate the
oars so that the blades are at right angles to the water, with
tips curving toward the stern. Check your hand position. The
backs of your hands should be flat with the knuckles forward.
Curve your thumbs over the end of the handles (6). This keeps
the thumb on the upper hand from dragging across or getting
pinched against the lower hand. This also assumes that your
hands are at the ends of the handles, where you have the
greatest leverage
When you are first practicing the procedure for getting in and out of the
boat, it is a good idea to have someone help you stabilize the boat by
holding the rigger. Your instructor can help you until you are confident
of both your balance and the procedure.
3 4
Adjustable straps enable you to pull back
to your “catch” position, and you can easily
slip your feet out if the boat capsizes.


70 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
5
6
Balance
When your hands are directly in front of you, left over right,
and the oars are straight out with the blades on the water, you
are in the safety position. If you hold this position, the boat will
not tip. Anytime you feel awkward, uncomfortable, or unbal-
anced or when you just want to stop and think or rest, move
into the safety position.
When you are in the safety position, the boat is very
stable. If you let go of the oars, however, the craft will be very
unstable. If you need one hand free to reach for something
or to make an adjustment, be sure to grasp the oars firmly
together with the other hand. If you need both hands free,
pull forward and lock the oars together against your chest,
as you did when you were adjusting your foot straps.


ROWING 71
.Rowing Skills
The Rowing Stroke
The rowing stroke for a sliding-seat boat has the same elements
as for a fixed-seat rowboat. The pull, however, is more of a
push with the legs, with your back and arms coming into play
later in the stroke. This leg push adds more power, as compared
with the fixed-seat rowboat stroke.
For the catch position, pull yourself all the way forward,
with your arms straight out ahead of you and your knees pulled
up to your chest, knees almost touching. Your upper body
should be leaning slightly forward over your knees.
When you have made your catch and are ready to apply
power, push with your legs, keeping your arms straight until
your legs are extended. Do not lift up. Keep your hands level,
pulling in a straight line as your legs extend. When your legs
are fully extended, your body should be leaning slightly back-
ward toward the bow, with your arms straight. At this point,
pull straight back with your arms for about five or six inches,
keeping your elbows close to your ribs, to the end of the stroke.
Push with legs Finish position
Catch position


72 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
Feathering
Recovery
Feather by dropping your wrists so that the blades are
flat on the water, with the edge toward the bow slightly higher.
Recover with the oars slipping across the top of the water. Do
not raise the oars out of the water or the boat will tip. Just as
you kept your hands level and moving in a straight line as you
exerted power, keep your hands in the same line and moving
straight out in front of you when feathering.
When you are first learning the rowing stroke, make your
stroke very slow and concentrate on moving your hands in
a horizontal line. Keep your stroke relatively short. When you
become more confident and experienced in the boat, you can
lengthen your stroke by reaching farther out for the catch, using
more of a pull with your back after your legs are extended, and
bringing your hands farther back at the end of the stroke.
During the recovery, you can carry the oars slightly off the
water to let the shell glide without the friction of the oars on
the water. As you arrive at the catch, rotate the oar to prepare
it for entry into the water, then lift your hands very slightly to
place the blade in the water.


ROWING 73
.Rowing Skills
Stopping
You can stop a shell very quickly by bringing the oars to the
safety position and dipping them with the blades almost per-
pendicular to the surface of the water. (If the blades are pre-
cisely perpendicular to the water and the boat has any speed,
the oars could be ripped out of the rower's hands.) Hold them
firmly in position in the water. To stop even more quickly,
dip in this position and push slightly forward on the handles.
Turns and Pivots
To turn under way in a rowing shell, hold the oar on the
inside of the turn straight out, in the feather position, and on
the surface of the water while making short forward strokes
with the other oar. The pivot maneuver in a rowing shell is
similar to making a turn, except that you stroke with both
oars. Begin in the safety position with both legs extended.
Do not use your legs when making the pivot. Pull on one oar
while backing water with the other, as in a fixed-seat rowboat,
but make only short strokes. The handles of the oars should
move a maximum of 12 to 15 inches (or arm’s length) and
then feather back to make another short stroke.
Pivot—catch
Pivot—push and pull
If you pull hard
on one oar while
pushing on the
other, you will
likely capsize,
because you
will have no
oar extension
to maintain your
stability and
equilibrium.


74 ROWING
Rowing Skills.
With the outside hand holding both grips,
place the other hand on the dock and
move the feet under the body.
Position the shell at the dock corner.
Never leave a
shell unattended
on the water.
21
Shore Landing
To land a shell, approach the shore until you are on water that
is about thigh deep. Stop, and then reverse the procedure you
followed when you got into the boat. Maintaining the safety
position with your oars, release your foot straps and step out
one leg at a time while holding the oars together in the safety
position with one hand.
With most shells you can cross the oar blades on the deck
just ahead of the cockpit, lift the boat out of the water, and set
it safely up on the beach with all rigging in place. You will need
two people to do this. Together lift at the bow and stern and
walk out carefully. This makes it quicker and easier to put the
boat back on the water when you are ready to resume rowing.
If you are through for the day or are going to be off the water
for some time, remove the oars from the locks and place both
oars and the shell on a rack or in another safe area.
Dock Landing
You also can land your shell at a dock. Docks at rowing clubs
may be specially built low to the water so you can bring your
shell in broadside with the deck below the rigger. If so, you can
approach and land much as you would to do a dock landing in
a fixed-seat rowboat. However, instead of bringing in the dock-
side oar, you should lift the blade so that oar and rigger go in
over the dock. When the shell is alongside the dock and is
held steady by a buddy, lift your weight off the seat and turn
90 degrees to a sitting position on the dock.


ROWING 75
.Rowing Skills
In most cases, however, the dock will be higher than your
rigger, and you will need to make your approach and landing at
a corner, with only the front half of your shell alongside the
dock. Hold water and gently coast up to where the dock corner
fits into the right angle formed where the rigger meets or
crosses the side of the shell (1).
When you are in position at the dock, hold the oars in
the locked position with the hand away from the dock, and
place the hand nearest the dock on top of the dock corner (2).
While a buddy steadies the bow, lift your weight off the seat
by pressing down on the oar grips and the dock (3). From this
position, turn and sit on the edge of the dock (4). To board
from a dock, reverse the procedure while a buddy holds and
steadies the shell.
Backing Water
To backwater, or reverse, sit up straight with the oars in the
safety position, catch at that position, and push forward using
only your arms. Make short, easy strokes and feather back for
another catch.
Be sure there
are no people or
objects on the
dock that the oar
might hit.
Press down on the dock and oar grips
while lifting weight off the seat. Rotate the body to sit on the
dock corner.
43





ROWING 77
.Rescue Procedures
Rescue Procedures
Being prepared to handle emergencies while out rowing makes
activities on the open water safer and more fun for everyone.
Considerate boatsmanship includes rendering assistance
promptly to other rowers or swimmers in distress.
Overboard Procedures
If your fixed-seat rowboat swamps or capsizes, stay with the
boat. Do not attempt to swim to shore. A boat’s buoyancy—
even when full of water—can support you and several others.
Your life jacket will keep you afloat safely. If the air and water
temperatures are warm and there is no risk of losing your grip,
you are safe hanging on to the side of the boat. However, it is
usually a good idea to get back in the boat. Then there is no
chance that you will lose your grip and be swept away by
wind or current.
Although the
water temperature
may not feel
uncomfortable,
long immersion
while holding on
to the side of the
boat could bring
on hypothermia.


78 ROWING
Rescue Procedures.
If you are with a friend and your boat capsizes, pull your-
self up over the side of the swamped boat while your friend
holds down the other side. Push down on the gunwale with
both hands so that you bring yourself up to where your hips
are about level with the gunwale. Don’t rush. Then roll over so
that you fall into the bottom of the swamped boat, landing on
your backside. You can then lean over the side to counterbal-
ance as your friend follows the same steps to come in over the
opposite side.
Once in the boat, sit as low as possible directly over the
keel. One person should sit on the boat bottom just ahead of
the transom seat with the legs against or over the midship seat.
The other should sit with his or her head at the bow and feet
against or over the bow seat. Facing each other makes it easier
to communicate and to see where you are.
The safest and least tiring way to move a swamped row-
boat to shore is to use your oar like a paddle or to hand paddle
while sitting low in the boat. Remember that balance is impor-
tant in a swamped boat. Any off-center movement will cause
the water in the boat to shift, and may roll the boat on its side,
dumping you out. Keep your weight low and over the keel.
If you have swamped and your boat is floating bottom up,
get on one side and lift up on the gunwale. After you break the
air seal, the boat may roll over on its own. If not, swim forward,
pushing the gunwale ahead of you, and the boat might roll
over, coming up under you so that you are in the boat when
it is right side up. You and a buddy can work together on this
maneuver. Another way is to push down on the gunwale while
pulling the keel toward you. As the boat begins to roll toward
you, hand walk across the bottom to the gunwale on the far
side and bring it over. If a line or long painter is handy, secure
one end to an oarlock and throw the line over the boat bottom.
From the opposite side, pull the line to you and walk the
bottom of the boat over to an upright position.
Remember that when you pull yourself up on the gunwale, the gunwale
will be forced down into the water. After you roll in and get your weight
off the gunwale, it will rise back up. Even when fully awash, the gunwale
of most boats will be a few inches above the level of the water.
If you are alone
and your boat
swamps and you
go over the side,
the best way to
get back in is over
the transom. If you
keep your body
weight directly
over the center of
the transom, you
can pull yourself
up and roll in.


ROWING 79
.Rescue Procedures
If you are rowing alone and are thrown out or fall over-
board while the boat remains afloat, grab the boat as quickly
as possible and hang on. To get back in, move to the stern.
Keep your weight at the center of the transom while pulling
yourself up with your arms and performing a strong kick in the
water until the top edge of the transom is about at your waist.
Drop your head and roll over so that you fall back first or bot-
tom first onto the transom seat. Your legs from the knees down
will be hanging over the transom or the gunwale next to the
transom. Rest momentarily in this position until the boat
steadies, then pull yourself in.
Swamped Boat Drill
To practice swamped boat procedures, you will need to capsize
the boat. Under the direct supervision of your counselor, begin
by bringing in the oars and dropping the oarlocks. Both you
and your rowing partner should sit on the same side, slightly
facing each other with your legs hanging over the gunwale.
Put the hand that is closest to your partner on the opposite
gunwale. Put the other hand on the gunwale under your legs.
Lean back and forth and rock the boat until the gunwale dips
below the water level and the boat begins to fill with water.
If the boat starts to roll over, continue to hold on to the oppo-
site gunwale and move away from the boat so it does
not come down on top of you.
If you are having difficulty capsizing the boat simply by
leaning, put both hands on one gunwale and stand on the
opposite side of the boat. When you rock the boat up with
your weight on your feet, you will roll it over. As the boat
comes over, move out from under it while maintaining your
grip on the gunwale. If you are capsizing with a buddy, be
sure to coordinate and communicate.
If you capsize a rowing shell, the same important rule
applies—stay with the boat. The recreational shells recom-
mended for use in Scouting have substantial buoyancy.
For traveling a long distance, take turns in and out of the boat to avoid
fatigue. Keep anyone who is cold, weak, or injured in the boat. In cooler
water, keep clothing on to prevent hypothermia. Weather permitting, you
may remove certain clothing (such as shoes) to make swimming easier.
Never let go of
the boat and swim
off to pick up
equipment. You
can always get
the equipment
after you are back
in the boat. The
wind can move
a boat that is
floating free very
rapidly across the
water. If you lose
contact, you might
not be able to
catch up with
the boat.


80 ROWING
Rescue Procedures.
Overboard—securing
Overboard—entering


ROWING 81
.Rescue Procedures
They also are self-righting and self-bailing, and they usually
have no loose gear. (On some shells, the seat may separate
from the runners.) Before capsizing a rowing shell, position
the oars alongside the boat to minimize the risk of boat or
oar damage, or personal injury.
To reboard a capsized shell in deep water, bring the oars
close to the boat and roll the boat over. Then secure the oar
handles together with the oar blades in the safety position.
On some shells, you can remove the foot straps and use them
to bind the oar handles together. If you cannot use the foot
straps, you can use whatever clothing or other material might
be handy. Then use both hands to pull yourself across the
cockpit and roll into the center of the boat.
If you have no way to secure the handles together, board
by positioning yourself at midship just ahead of the riggers,
facing the stern. Hold the oar handles together with one hand.
Rather than lifting yourself up and over, slide over the edge of
the cockpit, keeping your body low and maintaining your grip
on the oar handles. Although the boat may tip sideways as you
press down, if the oars stay in the safety position, the boat will
right itself as you step in.
If there is another boat on the water that can help you,
have the other boaters approach the stern of your shell and
hold it firmly upright while you come in over the side.
Obviously, those helping you need to be in a rowboat or other
stable craft from which they can reach over the side and hold
your stern. A skilled rower in a shell may be able to assist by
putting the back half of his or her shell alongside and against
the back half of your shell and holding your stern tight against
Overboard—swinging into position


82 ROWING
Rescue Procedures.
his or her midship with one hand while maintaining the oars in
the safety position with the other.
Even experienced rowers may occasionally capsize in
shells, so you should always have someone in a fixed-seat
rowboat or powerboat on the water to assist you.
If you capsize in a canoe rowing rig and the craft swamps,
remember to stay with the boat—hang on, do not lose contact
with the canoe. Slide over the gunwale
into an open area of the craft. Sit flat
on the bottom and use one oar to pad-
dle to shore where you can empty the
canoe and relaunch.
If you are overboard in deep water
and the canoe rowing rig is still afloat,
reenter using the flop-over method.
Begin by placing the oar blades on a
breastplate out of your way. Then move
along the gunwale to a midship point
where there is an open compartment.
Reach over the gunwale and place your hands flat on the bottom of canoe at edge of
bilge. Straighten your arms so the canoe leans toward you.


ROWING 83
.Rescue Procedures
Duck your head, kick hard, bend
one arm and drop your shoulder,
and prepare to roll your hips over
the gunwale.
Tuck your feet and legs and roll
over the gunwale, with your
shoulder making first contact
with the canoe bottom.
Land flat on your back with your
spine over the keel, your head
extending under the thwart, and
your feet and knees high. Lay on
the bottom until the canoe steadies
and you catch your breath. Then
move to your rowing position and
get under way.


84 ROWING
Rescue Procedures.
Boat Rescue
Boat rescues are an important part of lifesaving methods taught
and closely followed in all Scouting aquatics. A boat rescue
calls for swift action, good boatmanship, and proper caution.
Fixed-seat rescue—step in over
the transom.
Fixed-seat rescue—a quick launch
from shore.
Fixed-seat rescue—move to midship row-
ing position watching victim.
Fixed-seat rescue—out oars
watching victim.


ROWING 85
.Rescue Procedures
If a fixed-seat rowboat is positioned on the beach for
rescue use, it should have oars and life jackets in the boat and
should be tied or beached bow out for the quickest response. If
the beach has a gradual slope, pull the stern up onto the beach
so there is no risk of drifting and where it can quickly be lifted
at the transom and pushed out onto the water. Ideally, the stern
should be firmly beached with the bow floating on the water
and tied (if necessary) with a quick-release hitch.
Scouting America aquatics protection standards require that a rescue
boat be on the water for any open-water swimming activity or overboard
boating procedure.
Fixed-seat rescue—row toward the victim. Fixed-seat rescue—pivot at a safe
distance from the victim.
Fixed-seat rescue—backwater cautiously
to calm the victim.
Fixed-seat rescue—tow the victim to
shallow water.


86 ROWING
Rescue Procedures.
When a quick launch from shore is necessary, grab the
transom of the beach rowboat, check quickly to be sure that life
jackets and oars are in the boat, lift the transom, and run the
boat out into shallow water until there is sufficient depth to
board over the transom without grounding. Step in with your
hands on the gunwales, keep your weight low and centered,
then quickly turn and sit on the midship seat.
Remember to keep sight of the person who needs help and
to push the bow of the boat in the direction you want to go.
Use this forward momentum to your advantage while you get
in position and prepare to row. As soon as you are seated, slip
on the life jacket and put the oars in the out position. Look
over your shoulder to fix your direction toward the person in
the water and begin rowing.
For a fast start, make short, quick strokes to build momen-
tum and then lengthen into your full stroke. Remember to look
over your shoulder after every two or three strokes to be sure
the person in the water is still in sight and you are headed cor-
rectly. Keep on course by sighting over the stern. When you are
within one boat length of the person in the water, pivot and
hold water with your transom toward the subject, maintaining
a distance of 8 to 10 feet.
Communicate with the swimmer to determine if he or she
can respond to instructions. Throw your spare life jacket to the
person in the water. Remember to consider current and wind
conditions before making your throw. If the person responds
well to instructions, have the swimmer grab the life jacket and
hold it close to the chest so that he or she is fully supported
and in no danger.
If you have a buddy helping you with the rescue, you can
make the shore launch even more quickly. Jump into the boat
and move forward, still watching the swimmer, while your pas-
senger runs the boat out and then climbs in over the transom.
Always make your approach to a swimmer into the
wind or against the current. This allows you to keep
full control of the boat. Remember also that waves
or rough water can make launching from shore
dangerous. Wait for the right moment to launch the
boat. Usually, a comparatively mild interval will
follow a series of heavy waves.


ROWING 87
.Rescue Procedures
Watch the swimmer until the passenger is positioned and
shouts, “Ready.” Then give way. The passenger, sitting on
the transom seat, should keep an eye on the swimmer and
use hand signals to direct you to the person. On a signal from
the passenger, pivot the boat. Your passenger should assist
the swimmer.
If you are boarding a rescue boat from a pier, push off
from the pier as soon as you are in the boat and have moved to
your rowing position. Once you clear the dock and can begin
rowing, do so with short, quick strokes.
Before attempting to make contact with the swimmer, ship
your oars, put down the locks, and move to the stern of your
boat. Kneel on the bottom with your thighs against the transom
seat and extend a reach pole or oar to the swimmer. If the per-
son responds well to your directions and does not panic, bring
him or her to the stern of your boat by pulling in the oar or
reach pole, hand over hand. Make contact with the swimmer
and lay the person’s arms over the transom with his or her
hands on the transom seat.
Do not bring the person into the boat. Ask whether he or
she can hang on without help. If so, have the swimmer reach
up to hold on to the front edge of the transom seat with both
hands, with the top edge of the transom under the arms and
against the chest. This position lets you see the swimmer’s face
and anticipate whether the person is about to pass out or lose
his or her grip. If necessary, you can hold the person’s hand
against the edge of the seat with your foot while rowing.
The two-person procedure is preferable because
someone is always watching the swimmer, and the
rower can control the boat while the passenger assists
the swimmer. Also, the passenger can hold the
swimmer in place while the person at the oars rows
the boat to shore.
If the rescue boat is maintained ready at the dock,
it should be secured with a quick-release hitch and
positioned so that it is headed, or very easily
headed, out.


88 ROWING
Rescue Procedures.
If the swimmer is merely tired but fully able to maintain
grip on the boat while you row, the person can stay down in
the water and hold on to the transom. This position creates less
drag as you row. Row in until the swimmer can gain footing
and no longer needs the boat for support.
If you have a swimmer in tow and are approaching a pier
or dock, pivot when you are within a boat length or two of the
dock and backwater until you are 4 or 5 feet from the dock.
At this point, hold water and instruct the person to turn and
reach for the dock. Do not backwater into the dock and bump
the swimmer’s head. Hold your position on the water until you
are sure the swimmer is safely at the dock.
If you are helping an unconscious person or someone
who is injured or too weak to hold on to the boat while being
towed, you can tie the person in place using a painter or other
lashing material (belt, lanyard, or bandanna), or you can
bring the person into the boat.
In a rowing shell or canoe rowing rig, you can assist a tired swimmer
following the same procedure as in a fixed-seat craft—row to the
swimmer, pivot, and backwater your stern to where the swimmer can
grab the boat while talking and calming the person. Tow the swimmer
to shallow water.
Canoe rig rescue—follow the same approach and tow procedures as in other craft.


ROWING 89
.Rescue Procedures
Rough-Water Maneuvers
The craft used in Scouting America rowing activities are not
intended for use on rough water. Even a medium chop can rock
the boat, making it very difficult to effectively use the oars. You
should never set out during a storm or when the water is rough.
Even though you should always take every precaution to
avoid rough water and storm conditions, weather can change
quickly. You should be prepared to deal with unexpected rough
conditions so that you can get your craft back to shore as
quickly as possible. If you get caught out in a storm, sit as low
in the boat as possible, preferably on the bottom. This increases
the stability of the boat. If you take on water, bail with what-
ever you have available. Hold on so that you are stable, with
the boat balanced.
If you are making headway, steer the boat into the
waves at a slight angle, not head-on. This will reduce pound-
ing. Do not let the boat go sideways into the waves. If you are
sideways and wallowing in the troughs of the waves, there is
a much greater chance of capsizing. If you are in a rowboat
with a transom and your stern is headed into the waves, you
are more likely to take on water from waves breaking over
the transom.
If it is impossible to make headway, it might help to trail a
bucket, a drogue, a sea anchor, or whatever you have that will
cause a dragging effect. This will keep the bow headed into the
wind, prevent wallowing in the trough, and reduce the drift of
your boat downwind.
The best and
safest rule for
rough water is
to get ashore.
Be aware of
approaching
storms and
head for safety
before the
weather breaks.
Before an outing, check the weather.
If you do not have experience with
weather patterns in the area, talk with
someone who does. Do not take chances
if the weather is uncertain. When you are on the
water, stay within a reasonable distance of the
shore and keep an eye to the sky for any signs of
approaching storms or weather changes.


90 ROWING
Rowing for Fun and Exercise.
Rowing for Fun
and Exercise
Rowing may appear to target only the upper body, but in fact it
gives the whole body a thorough workout. In addition to being
an excellent form of aerobic exercise, rowing is also a great way
to get outside and enjoy the outdoors. You can spend a lazy day
out in the middle of a lake fishing, watching wildlife, or just
hanging out with your friends. You also can join a rowing team
and experience the camaraderie of working toward a goal and
the thrill of crossing the finish line with your buddies, knowing
that all your hard work has paid off.
Tandem Rowing
If you want to reach your full potential as a rower and team
member, find a dedicated partner and practice tandem rowing.
Paired-oar rowing in a standard fixed-seat rowboat is a chal-
lenge worthy of even the best rower.
Tandem rowing


ROWING 91
.Rowing for Fun and Exercise
Practice for several hours with or without a coxswain, and
you will be able to put on a good show. If you have a coxswain
on the transom seat, with the oarsmen on the midship and
bow seats, the coxswain will call signals and set the course.
The coxswain signals so that the rower in the bow position can
see and understand them. If you are rowing tandem without a
coxswain, the rower in the bow calls the signals and the one at
the stern sets the pace.
Crew Rowing
Becoming part of a rowing team can be an exciting and reward-
ing experience. Crew rowing is increasingly popular among
high school groups in many communities in the United States.
In addition, a number of colleges offer scholarships to competi-
tive rowers.
If your school does not sponsor a rowing team, look for
teams sponsored by community groups or rowing clubs. Often
former college rowers and recreational rowers will form clubs
to encourage rowing. They may provide equipment and
instruction to new members. These same members, as parents,
then form junior rowing teams and encourage competition with
other rowing teams in the area.
Race events may have hundreds of different races, but
there are only six basic boat configurations. Sweep rowers come
in pairs (2s), fours (4s), and eights (8s). Scullers row in singles
(1x), doubles (2x), and quads (4x). Sweep rowers may or may
not carry a coxswain to steer the boat and serve as the on-the-
water coach. All eights have coxswains, but pairs, quads, and
fours may or may not. The coaches will help you determine
which boat configuration will be best suited to your skill and
experience level.
Crew rowing—Teamwork is required for the launch.


92 ROWING
Rowing for Fun and Exercise.
Crew rowers are identified by their position in the boat.
The rower sitting in the bow is the No. 1 seat or bow seat.
The next rower seated with his or her back to the No. 1 rower
is No. 2, then No. 3, and so on. The rower closest to the stern
is known as the stroke. The stroke must be a strong rower with
excellent technique who sets the rhythm of the boat for the rest
of the rowers.
Crew rowers speak in terms of strokes per minute (SPM),
literally the number of strokes the boat completes in a minute’s
time. The stroke rate at the start is high—38–45, even into the
50s for an eight—and then “settles” to a race cadence typically
in the 30s. Crews sprint to the finish, taking the rate up once
again. Crews may call for a “Power 10” during the race—a
demand for the crew’s most intense 10 strokes.
In crew rowing, teamwork is the most important aspect.
Rowing isn’t a great sport for athletes looking for MVP status.
You learn Teamwork with a capital “T.” The athlete trying to
stand out in an eight will only make the boat slower. The crew
made up of individuals willing to work together for a common
goal will likely win the race.
When you’re watching a race, look for the crew that’s
making it look easy. They are most likely the ones doing
the best job. Look for a continuous, fluid motion from
the rowers: synchronization in the boat, clean catches,
and the boat with the most consistent speed.
Rowing for Exercise
When you use a sliding-seat boat, rowing is a nearly perfect
full-body aerobic exercise that gives all the major muscle groups
a good workout and develops strength, coordination, and car-
diovascular health. Rowing a standard fixed-seat rowboat is an
excellent upper-body conditioner and is particularly good for
toning and tightening the midsection. It also can help strength-
en the lower back. The stretching and flexing of the muscles of
the lower back can relieve soreness many people develop, often
as the result of inactivity. In addition, rowing is a low-impact
sport that is easier on the cartilage and joints than many other
sports, such as running, tennis, and downhill skiing.


ROWING 93
.Rowing for Fun and Exercise
Crew rowing—“Teamwork” overtakes the leader
in competition.
Crew rowing—“Stroke” rower in stern sets the pace.
Crew rowing—Four-person sweep crew with coxswain in bow.





ROWING 95
.Rowing Resources
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Deck of First Aid; Basic
Illustrated Wilderness First Aid;
Emergency First Aid pocket guide; Be
Prepared First Aid Book; Safety Afloat
pamphlet; Sea Scout Manual; Canoeing,
Kayaking, Motorboating, and Small-
Boat Sailing merit badge pamphlets
Books
Boyne, Daniel J. Essential Sculling:
An Introduction to Basic Strokes,
Equipment, Boat Handling,
Technique, and Power.
Lyons Press, 2000.
Brown, Daniel James. The Boys in the
Boat: Nine Americans and Their
Epic Quest for Gold at the 1936
Berlin Olympics. Penguin, 2014.
Churbuck, D.C. The Book of Rowing.
Overlook Press, 2008.
Cunningham, Frank. The Sculler at
Ease. Grandview Street Press, 1999.
Halberstam, David. The Amateurs: The
Story of Four Young Men and Their
Quest for an Olympic Gold Medal.
Ballantine Books, 1996.
Hamilton, Gordon. Sculling in a
Nutshell. Gordon Hamilton, 2013.
Maybery, Keith. Rowing: The Essential
Guide to Equipment and Techniques.
Stackpole Books, 2002.
McArthur, John. High Performance
Rowing. Crowood Press, 1997.
Thompson, Luke. Essential Boating
for Teens. Children’s Press, 2000.
Magazines
Rowing Magazine
Rivermill Suite 440
85 Mechanic St.
Lebanon, NH 03766
Telephone: 603-448-5090
rowingnews.com
Organizations and Websites
USRowing
2 Wall St.
Princeton, NJ 08540
Toll-free telephone:
800-314-4ROW (4769)
usrowing.org
Rowing Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


96 ROWING
Rowing Resources.
Acknowledgments
The Rowing merit badge has been
aligned with the Human On-Water
Standards developed by the American Boat
and Yacht Council (ABYC) and others.
Scouting America thanks the countless
volunteers who worked to develop these
standards.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Dave Bell, courtesy—page 17 (Type I
life jacket)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Sam Kolich—cover (lake)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 9–10, 21–25, 31, 33–35, 38–39,
47–49, 57, and 59
Brian Payne—pages 17 (Type II life
jacket) and 18 (seat cushion)
Randy Piland—page 19
Scouting America thanks USRowing
for its ongoing support of the
Rowing merit badge. USRowing
serves as the national governing
body for the sport of rowing in the
United States, as recognized by the
U.S. Olympic Committee. Visit
USRowing at usrowing.org.