AMERICAN
BUSINESS
STEM-BasedSTEM-Based


AMERICAN
BUSINESS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/American-Business or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35850
ISBN 978-0-8395-3325-2
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
FPO


AMERICAN BUSINESS 3


4 AMERICAN BUSINESS


AMERICAN BUSINESS 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
History of Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Components of Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
Business Cycles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Labor Unions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
How Businesses Are Organized . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Important Factors of Business . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Credit and Banking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52
Money and Inflation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
U.S. Department of Labor . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Insurance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
American Business Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68





AMERICAN BUSINESS 7
.Introduction
Different
countries have
different business
systems; the
kind of business
system a country
supports is
related to that
country’s type
of government.
Introduction
As students and Scouts, you are learning about new subjects and
preparing for your future. When you become an adult, you will
gain several rights, among them the right to vote, own property,
and sign contracts. Earning the American Business merit badge
can help you learn practical business matters that will be useful
throughout life. Learning how businesses function will help you
understand our society and possibly determine how you will
choose to live in the future.
American business and government are based on free
enterprise, including individual freedom and opportunity. The
four features of free enterprise are economic freedom, volun-
tary exchange, private property, and profit motive. Economic
freedom allows all individuals to make their own economic
choices. Owners and workers can pursue their own interests,
and consumers may spend their money however they choose.
Voluntary exchange allows consumers to trade (buy/sell) goods
and services in an open marketplace. Land and assets, such
as equipment, products, and machines, are privately owned
in free enterprise (private property). Profit motive encourages
both individuals and businesses to improve their financial secu-
rity, which results in growing the local and global economy.
Even under a free enterprise system, though, some govern-
ment supervision and regulations are needed to prevent abuses
and to keep things as fair as possible. For instance, the Small
Business Administration (SBA) helps small businesses obtain
financing (loans) on reasonable terms from private sources that
are licensed and regulated by the SBA.
Through voting, we can help choose those officials who pass
the laws and regulations that affect how business is conducted.
You can vote for those who share your opinion. These freedoms
we now take for granted were considered radical ideas when
our country was founded in 1776. Nevertheless, the American
business system and government have allowed citizens here to
enjoy high standards of living.


8 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Introduction.
How Scouting Relates
to Business
Scouting relates to good business practices in many
ways. The Scout motto “Be Prepared” is one way. By
the time you are ready to enter the workforce (that
includes a high school student working part-time!) or
start a business, you should have some knowledge of
how business works.
The Scout Oath to do your best and help people
also applies if you are to be successful. In the business
world, you must be trustworthy—dependable in your
position or business and someone who pays bills on
time, among other things. That aside, you should help
those who are less fortunate by helping charities without
thought for personal gain. As a worker and business-
person, you also need to be friendly and courteous to
attract and keep customers. Follow the laws and rules
of business.
A Scout also should be thrifty, and set money
aside for emergencies and other unforeseen needs.
All citizens should help protect and conserve natural
resources to make sure they are available for future
generations. So the values you learn in Scouting will
help you in adulthood and your career.








AMERICAN BUSINESS 11
.History of Business
History of Business
Business has been conducted ever since the earliest humans
began trading with one another. They lived by applying
human energy to natural resources. Animals were caught
by hand, fruits and other edible plants were picked by hand,
and humans lived in caves, under rocks, and in trees.
Civilization began when early humans discovered that
using tools enhanced their ability to produce useful things.
We use many kinds of tools—hammers, saws, screwdrivers.
Other tools that you might not have thought of include can
openers, smartphones, and utilities such as gas and oil.
Electricity is a tool because it supplies nonhuman power to
run machinery and to provide light and heat. Wheelbarrows,
trains, vehicles, and highways also are tools because they
increase the ability to move people and goods to places where
they can be more useful.
A tool is anything, natural or synthetic, that saves
human energy and produces something that normally
cannot be created by human energy alone. For
example, using a stone or a trap to catch an animal
makes the task easier, thus saving human energy. A
fire can be used to cook something, a task that human
energy alone cannot produce.


12 AMERICAN BUSINESS
History of Business.
Eventually, many things made by hand started being
made by machines, and that started the Industrial Revolution.
Machines now produce most consumer goods, such as clothing,
cars, furniture, computers, sports equipment, and televisions.
Today, most Americans use some type of tool or machine in
their work.
The benefits of using machines can easily be seen when
comparing industrialized nations to less-developed countries,
where most production relies on human labor. Less-developed
countries have lower standards of living and fewer consumer
goods than industrialized countries. With their earnings, people
in industrialized countries can buy goods and services that
they and their families want and need. Many people save
part of their earnings for future purchases, emergencies,
or investments.
The Evolution of Franchising
Franchising has come a long way since its early years in the Middle Ages.
Back then, a local ruler such as a lord might grant merchants the right or
privilege to sell their goods within a particular geographical area. Modern
franchising as we recognize it gives individuals an opportunity to invest
in a proven product or service that has a history of success. A franchised
product or service might have a reputation for quality and consistency, an
established concept, and a loyal following, among other characteristics.
You might be familiar with franchising because one or two franchises
are on your list of favorite places to eat. The most recognizable franchise
is the fast-food type. However, a franchise could be just about any type
of business—restaurants, auto dealerships, professional sports teams,
theaters—you name it, it could be a franchise.
Today, franchising is a highly regulated industry that plays a key role
in the U.S. economy. According to the International Franchise Association,
there are more than 800,000 franchise-related businesses in the United
States. These businesses support nearly 9.1 million jobs and account for
about $994 billion in overall economic output. That’s a lot of money.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 13
.History of Business
Industrial Revolution
The Industrial Revolution basically refers to the adoption
of machines to do work that previously had been done by
hand because it increased productivity and efficiency. It is
called a revolution because it marked the transformation from
agricultural economies that relied on simple tools to industrial
economies that relied on complex machines. Industrialism
swept through England in the 18th century, but did not occur
in the United States until early in the 19th century. Before then,
about four out of five Americans were farmers and lived in
rural communities.
Industrial development encouraged people to move from
rural areas to towns and cities. Large factories located there
needed people to operate the machines making products that
were once made by individuals or in small workshops. Because
so many people moved to urban centers, what had been largely
an agricultural economy changed into an industrial one.
Besides changing
the economy,
the Industrial
Revolution altered
society in other
ways. For example,
women began to
leave their homes
to enter the
workforce. The
movement also
led to superior
military technology
and helped the
United States and
European nations
become the most
powerful countries
in the 19th and
20th centuries.
During the 19th century, factory workers endured low-paying
positions and harsh conditions. Eventually laws and labor unions
improved conditions and wages.


14 AMERICAN BUSINESS
History of Business.
The Industrial Revolution did not begin overnight. It
occurred as a result of the knowledge and skills people had
been learning for thousands of years. In about 1750, some
important discoveries and inventions allowed people to do
many things that had been impossible before. Three fields in
which the greatest progress has been made include energy,
materials, and mass production.
Energy
The machines that were used before 1750 were mainly powered
by humans, animals, water, or wind. In 1769, Scottish engineer
and inventor James Watt patented a steam engine that improved
on previous engines that had been used to pump water. Watt
made a series of inventions that led to modern steam engines.
At the beginning of the 19th century, noncondensing steam
engines developed by British engineer and inventor Richard
Trevithick and American inventor Oliver Evans led to the
development of engines used to power trains and ships.
In the 1800s, steam locomotives helped propel the Industrial Revolution at a rapid
pace because it enabled people and goods to travel farther and faster.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 15
.History of Business
For more than 125
years, water and
steam have been
used to power
turbines that
generate electric-
ity. Those energy
sources had pre-
viously been stud-
ied and written
about but never
consistently
harnessed. Today,
turbine-powered
generators
produce most
of the world’s
electricity.
The internal combustion engine, introduced in the 1880s,
quickly led to the development of the automobile, which had
been unfeasible when powered by larger steam engines. By using
combustion engines powered by fossil fuels such as gasoline and
oil, automobiles and trucks allowed people and products to travel
farther and faster.
Similar engines were used in planes to make travel and the
transport of products even more efficient, thus helping busi-
nesses expand to locations previously beyond their reach. When
jet propulsion engines (which still use fossil fuels) were devel-
oped, travel and product transport became even faster. Later,
solid fuels were developed to send powerful rockets to the
moon and unmanned rockets to faraway planets.
Nuclear energy also has been harnessed to produce electric-
ity and weapons of mass destruction. Nuclear power, which is
energy released by the splitting or fusing of atomic nuclei, is used
to produce electricity in several countries. But deadly radiation is a
by-product of producing this type of energy.
Better ways are being developed to generate electricity,
such as solar and wind power. This is a clean "fuel" that does
not release pollutants into the environment like fossil fuels do.
Energy from the sun and wind is also a renewable resource—it
will never run out or be depleted.
Batteries are another form of energy. Various types and
sizes are used in everything from vehicles and watches to
laptop computers and mobile phones. More discoveries and
inventions in energy have led to products that people had
previously been unable to envision. These new energy supplies
have led to more and better production. Millions of people
now own energy-powered devices, and much of the world is
connected one way or another because of these inventions.


16 AMERICAN BUSINESS
History of Business.
Materials
Humans have used tools for thousands of years. However, the
types of items people could make and use in ancient times
were limited by available materials. Most materials used were
wood, stone, and fibers, such as those that could be acquired
from animals (wool) and plants (cotton). These materials could
be cut, carved, and woven by hand tools that often were made
from stone, metal, or wood.
Iron became an important and valuable metal because
it is tough and durable. However, because it is difficult to
manufacture, iron was scarce and expensive. As metalworking
technology improved, other materials, such as alloys (a mixture
of two or more metals, or a metal mixed with a nonmetallic
In ancient times,
royalty considered
iron to be more
valuable to them
than gold.
The American Steel Industry
The steel industry in the United States, which started in the late 1850s,
put the country on the map as a world economic leader. The abundance
in iron ore deposits and inexpensive water transportation via the Great
Lakes to ship the materials positioned the Midwest as the production
center of this giant industry.
Following the Civil War in 1865, the steel industry quickly grew due
to the new Bessemer process of making steel and the great expansion of
the American railroad. Between 1880 and 1900, steel production increased
from 1.25 million tons to 10 million tons. By 1910, the United States was
producing more than 24 million tons of steel. This increase was due in
large part to the booming automobile industry.
The steel industry continued to set the pace of the nation’s economic
strength well beyond World War II and reached its peak production of 141
million tons in 1969. However, competition abroad with more efficient
steel plants and lower labor costs began affecting the U.S. steel industry.
By the mid-1970s, American production plummeted to 89 million tons—a
37 percent dip. Despite that reduction, the industry continued to employ
nearly half a million workers at very high wages. By the late 1980s, the
industry rebounded with 102.7 million tons produced by a reduced labor
force of 169,000 steelworkers. Production per worker more than tripled
during that 13-year period.
Though not the world leader it once was, the steel industry in
America is growing and becoming more competitive.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 17
.History of Business
material) and carbon materials were developed and used in
all kinds of products. Other metals humans use include silver,
copper, aluminum, nickel, platinum, tungsten, uranium, and
chromium. Titanium has become well-known for its strength
and light weight. It is a popular material for sports items such
as golf clubs and bicycles.
Plastics also have become an integral part of our lives.
Plastics have been used for thousands of years, but it wasn’t
until the early 1900s that new forms were invented, suitable
for all kinds of uses. Among the thousands of items made with
plastics are cars, computers, recreational equipment, houses,
clothing, furniture, carpets, and credit cards. Some names of
plastics include polyurethane, polyester, acrylic, and nylon.
Mass Production
Eli Whitney, inventor of the cotton
gin, got the idea in 1798 of using inter-
changeable parts in manufacturing. By
using interchangeable, standard parts
that had been manufactured before-
hand, it was possible to produce goods
quicker and cheaper than with custom-
made parts.
This idea led to the use of an
assembly line, which used conveyer
belts to move a product along to differ-
ent stations where people assembled
individual parts until the product was
completed. This system was first used in 1913 by American
industrialist Henry Ford and his partners to produce flywheel
magnetos, the ignition system used in one of the first automo-
biles produced, the Model T.
Over the years, production has become more efficient
because of the use of robotic tools and computers. Robots, for
example, can perform many specific tasks more efficiently than
humans. Computers can be used for inventory-tracking systems
that assemble and deliver items when they are needed.
Before the
mass production
of cars, most
Americans
traveled by
horses, wagons,
or steam-powered
trains and boats.
Because it is
a versatile
and lightweight
synthetic material,
plastic can be
made hard,
flexible, elastic,
large, small, thin,
and thick.
Eli Whitney


18 AMERICAN BUSINESS
History of Business.
Henry Ford
Henry Ford began using stan-
dardized interchangeable parts
and assembly-line techniques in
1913, 10 years after founding
the Ford Motor Company. He
helped popularize the technique
and made assembly-line work
more appealing by offering
higher wages. He did that to
prevent workers from leaving
because of the monotonous
work associated with assembly lines. It gave him a
stable workforce and helped double the company’s
profits in two years.
In 1941, Ford’s assembly-line techniques won him
government contracts to manufacture bomber parts
needed for World War II. Eventually his company made
entire planes. By the end of the war in 1945, Ford Motor
Company had manufactured more than 8,000 planes.
Henry Ford
1913 Ford Model T assembly line


AMERICAN BUSINESS 19
.History of Business
In 1851,
America’s rapid
advancement was
evident at the first
world’s fair in
London. The work
of the Americans
attracted so much
attention that the
British sent a
committee to the
United States
to study its
manufacturing
techniques and
accomplishments.
Starting in the United States
Because of the Industrial Revolution’s success in Europe, in
1791, U.S. Secretary of the Treasury Alexander Hamilton called
for the same type of revolution in the United States. He and
many others wanted the United States, which had won its
independence from Great Britain just a few years earlier, to
become economically strong. They organized associations
that promoted industrialization.
Although more than three-fourths of the working
population in the United States was involved in agriculture at
the time, the Industrial Revolution spread rapidly. Americans
quickly adopted industrialization. A strong work ethic, the
freedom of people and goods to move across state borders,
and access to abundant natural resource reserves helped,
and the United States continued to advance even faster than
the Europeans. By the end of the century, the United States
became the world leader in manufacturing and spurred what is
known as the Second Industrial Revolution. The United States
continues to be one of the world's largest producers of goods.
Globalization
Globalization is a term used to describe an increase in
international trade, global communications, foreign investments,
and global companies. The result of globalization is a world
economy in which the borders between countries have blurred.
This new economy has allowed entrepreneurs (business owners
and management) and corporations to raise money anywhere
in the world and to produce and sell goods or services nearly
anywhere. Technology, such as the internet, has helped make
global corporations and markets possible.
Globalization has grown rapidly since the 1970s, but it has
been an economic trend since the end of World War II in 1945.
At the end of the war, the United States established policies that
encouraged trade and business ventures with other countries,
except those with Communist governments, such as members
of the former Soviet Union (now Russia and several other
countries).
Corporations sometimes move production to poorer
countries to take advantage of lenient labor laws and lower
standards of living in an effort to reduce labor costs. As a
result, workers in developed nations fear that they will lose


20 AMERICAN BUSINESS
History of Business.
their positions to lower-paid workers in foreign countries.
For example, some of the products you use may have been
manufactured in countries such as China or Vietnam. Fifty
years ago, those same types of products probably were
manufactured in the United States. When companies moved
manufacturing plants to other countries, doing so kept the
prices of those products low for Americans but left some
Americans without work.
Furthermore, many world leaders are concerned that the
culture in their countries may be endangered by the increased
exposure to the internet, satellite television, and other media.
Yet, supporters say that consumers and capitalists are benefiting.
Global trade has increased choice, spending, and international
travel, and led to better living standards. They say that
globalization has led to greater understanding between cultures.
The evolving global economy no doubt presents challenges
to economists, politicians, environmentalists, and human rights
groups. Many experts compare globalization with the Industrial
Revolution because of the way it is altering the world.
Brick-and-Mortar vs. Online Businesses
The internet has radically changed global communication and the
way business is conducted. Entrepreneurs and companies have
opened online businesses to buy, sell, and distribute products
and services. This allows consumers to buy products from almost
anywhere in the world. While some conduct business only over
the internet, many companies use websites to complement their
retail outlets. There are many differences in operating a brick-
and-mortar business versus an online business.
Online commerce allows an individual or a company to
start a business with limited resources (time, money, people,
facilities). With a computer and an internet connection, an
online business can sell and ship products or services from a
small space such as a home. Although an online business does
not have some of the same complexities and costs as a brick-
and-mortar business, the owner of an online business needs
to consider many of the same factors, including taxes and
inventory storage. Many states now require sales taxes to be
paid on goods and services ordered from another state. Often,
this is self-reported when buyers file their annual tax returns.
However, more and more online businesses are collecting
and paying sales taxes like brick-and-mortar businesses do.
One goal of
globalization is
to help people
everywhere raise
their standards of
living and to live
more diversified
lifestyles. This
has happened to
a certain extent,
but some critics
and experts fear
that globalization
may be causing
more problems
than it is solving.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 21
.History of Business
Bill Gates
If you have a personal computer, you
probably own some Microsoft software
and hardware, which shows how big a
company Bill Gates has built. Microsoft’s
success has made Gates one of the
most influential people in the computer
industry—and one of the richest people
in the world. Gates cofounded Microsoft
with high school friend Paul Allen in 1975.
Together, they began learning about
computers and programming languages
in high school.
In 1973, Gates entered Harvard
University. While there, he and Allen devel-
oped a version of the BASIC computer
programming language for the Altair 8800,
one of the first personal computers, and
licensed the software to MITS. Then they
formed Microsoft (then it was Micro-soft)
to develop BASIC for other computer
companies. By 1999, Microsoft dominated
the personal computer business.
Microsoft cofounder Bill Gates
The MITS Altair 8800
Additionally, the owners of online businesses may need to
consider moving into larger facilities when they need more
room for inventory and personnel.
A brick-and-mortar business is where a company has a retail
location that allows customers to physically look at merchandise
or discuss services they are considering purchasing. A brick-and-
mortar location may also offer a website that showcases its goods
and services. Starting a business as a brick-and-mortar location
has much higher costs, including rent, higher inventory levels,
insurance, location build-out costs, and more employees. Often,
a business may start as an online business to develop a customer
base and grow profits in order to reinvest and move into a brick-
and-mortar store.


22 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Components of Business.
Components of Business
It is commonly recognized that
business includes five compo-
nents or major functional areas.
These five components are
accounting, economics, finance,
management, and marketing. If
you start your own business or
work for another organization,
you will find that these five func-
tional areas are very important,
not only to for-profit businesses
but also to nonprofit organizations. If you decide to study any
business topic in college, you will likely be required to take at
least one or two classes in each of these functional areas.
According to Investopedia, accounting is “the systematic
and comprehensive recording of financial transactions,” as
well as “the process of summarizing, analyzing, and reporting
these transactions.” The financial statements that are produced
during the accounting process provide information about a
business’s operations, profit or loss, and cash flow. Accounting
is one of the key functions for almost any business; it may be
handled by a bookkeeper and an accountant at small firms or
by sizable accounting departments with dozens of accountants
and administrative employees at larger companies.
Economics, according to Investopedia, is a social science
that “studies how individuals, businesses, governments, and
nations make choices on allocating resources to satisfy their
wants and needs.” There are two main branches of econom-
ics: Macroeconomics focuses on the economy as a whole, and
microeconomics focuses on individual consumers and busi-
nesses. The economy can be impacted by wars and shortages
of important products, such as oil and precious metals.
FINANCE
BUSINESS
ACCOUNTING
ECONOMICS
MANAGEMENT
MARKETING


Investopedia describes finance as the study of money,
investments, and other financial instruments. It also consists
of financial systems, which include the public, private, and
government spaces. There are three main categories of finance:
public finance, corporate finance, and personal finance.
Financial products include stocks, insurance, retirement plans,
and bank accounts.
Merriam-Webster.com defines management as “the
conducting or supervising of something (such as a
business).” The field of management includes human
resource management, which is concerned with employee
recruitment, training, compensation, motivation, and even
firing. Management also includes management (computer)
information systems, which uses computer-related technologies
and tools to help managers make decisions, and organizational
behavior, which is how an organization (either for-profit or
nonprofit) interacts with other organizations and the type of
personality or corporate culture it has.
Marketing encompasses the activities of a company to
promote the buying or selling of a product or service, accord-
ing to Investopedia. These activities include advertising, sell-
ing, and delivering products to people. Those who work in
marketing departments at companies try to get the attention of
target audiences by using slogans, packaging design, celebrity
endorsements, and general media exposure. The four P’s of
marketing are product, place, price, and promotion. Product
and price are self-explanatory. Place can otherwise be referred
to as distribution, or how a product gets from production to
the final customer. It includes wholesale and retail operations.
Promotion has four elements, known as the promotional mix:
advertising, personal selling, sales promotions, and public
relations/publicity.
Marketing people may claim that marketing is most
important because you cannot have a business without being
able to sell it. Accountants may also claim that accounting is
most important because ethical representation of a company
in relationship to financial statements and taxes is necessary.
Accounting also keeps track of a company’s money. However,
despite these claims, all five components of business are
equally important to have a successful business.
.Components of Business
AMERICAN BUSINESS 23





AMERICAN BUSINESS 25
.Business Cycles
Business Cycles
Even though business in capitalist countries has thrived since
the Industrial Revolution of the late 1800s, there have been
many economic ups and downs. These fluctuations are called
business cycles.
While the timing of business cycles usually is unpredictable,
many economists believe in a theory developed by American
economist Wesley Mitchell that divides cycles into four predict-
able phases: prosperity, liquidation, depression, and recovery.
During prosperity, production grows and employment,
wages, and profits rise. However, as the growth continues,
many effects can cause a recession or depression. For example,
as production increases, so do production costs. Increased
production also could cause a shortage of materials and result
in lower production and higher prices.
A steady increase in prices is called inflation. To prevent
inflation, governments often will raise interest rates, which
causes businesses and consumers to borrow less money. As
a result, both buy less. With a weaker demand for products,
inventories begin to grow and prices drop as companies try to
liquidate (turn property into money) by selling off inventories
to pay debts. Companies begin to lay off workers and invest
less. Some businesses are forced to close. When business
activity slows drastically, the cycle is in a depression.
Recovery occurs when consumers start to buy and demand
products again. The government may act by lowering interest
rates and offering tax rebates to help rekindle the economy.
Once the recovery gains momentum, a new prosperity
phase begins.
Some cycles last
only a few years
while more severe
down cycles
have lasted
longer than eight
years. The worst
financial collapse
happened in
1929, and the
country was
thrown into what
is known as the
Great Depression.
That period lasted
through the
1930s and spread
worldwide. It
was not until 1941
that full recovery
was realized.


Labor union demonstration, early 1900s


AMERICAN BUSINESS 27
.Labor Unions
Labor Unions
A trade union is an association of workers that bargains with
employers to improve wages, hours, and workplace conditions.
This process is called collective bargaining. The goal is to make
a contract—a collective-bargaining agreement—that meets the
needs of both the union and the employer. If they can’t reach
an agreement, the union might conduct a strike against the
employer to try and gain its demands.
Unions began with the changes brought by the Industrial
Revolution in the late 1800s and early 1900s. An increase in
the number of people moving to cities from rural areas to
find positions in factories created a labor surplus and made
employees more dependent on their employers. Further, the shift
to automation—the use of complex machinery in production—
meant fewer workers were needed and led to lower wages, unsafe
working conditions, fewer benefits, and other abuses. To help
offset dependency and to provide employees with more rights,
better wages, and better working conditions, unions began to
form. Much opposition and many legal barriers made forming
unions a rugged, and sometimes violent, struggle.


28 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Labor Unions.
Local labor unions usually include people who are employed
in the same factory, store, or office. Or, the employees of a num-
ber of similar smaller companies might form a single local union.
People working for a large company often are organized into
one industrial unit. In some instances, a single large company
might be organized into multiple units. That means workers
doing different kinds of work, such as electricians, carpenters,
truck drivers, and assembly-line operators, are members of sepa-
rate local unions, with each union having its own officers.
Unions are of two principal types: craft and industrial.
Craft unions include workers who perform a specific kind of
work, such as electricians and carpenters. Industrial unions
include workers in a certain industry, such as autoworkers and
steelworkers. There also are unions that include government
workers, teachers, nurses, pilots, flight attendants, journalists,
and professional athletes.
Examples of major American labor unions currently in
existence include:
• American Federation of Government Employees
• American Federation of Teachers
• Bakery, Confectionery, Tobacco Workers and Grain Millers
International Union
• Communications Workers of America
• International Association of Bridge, Structural, Ornamental
and Reinforcing Iron Workers
• International Association of Fire Fighters
• International Association of Machinists and
Aerospace Workers
• International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers
• International Brotherhood of Teamsters
• International Union of Painters and Allied Trades
• National Nurses United
Any union member who has a dispute over pay,
working conditions, or another item covered by the
contract may talk to the union representative, a union
member who helps employees when they have
complaints against the company. If a union member
has personal or family problems, a union counselor
can help. Unions also employ business agents to
manage union operations.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 29
.Labor Unions
• Screen Actors Guild–American Federation of Television and
Radio Artists
• Service Employees International Union
• United Brotherhood of Carpenters and Joiners of America
• United Food and Commercial Workers International Union
• United Mine Workers of America
Before a collective bargaining agreement expires, the union
and company representatives meet to bargain on a new contract.
If an agreement can’t be reached, a mediator may be called upon
to help settle the dispute. If a new contract is not signed before
the old one expires, union members might vote to strike—refuse
to work—until a new contract is signed. This gives unions a lot of
power. However, employers sometimes call for a lockout, which
means union members aren’t allowed to work because they won’t
meet the company’s demands. In government positions, or those
positions that affect public interest, the government might order
workers to return to work for a limited time while contract talks
resume. This government action protects the public from the
interruption of necessary services or supplies.
Unions also try to bargain for closed shops, or union shops,
which means that an employee must belong to a union to work
at that particular company. Open shops mean that a worker can
belong or not belong to a union and still work there. Unions
believe open shops weaken their position; that’s why they try to
bargain for closed shops.





AMERICAN BUSINESS 31
.How Businesses are Organized
How Businesses
Are Organized
Businesses are generally organized into sole proprietorships,
partnerships, corporations, limited liability companies, and joint
ventures. The most common form of business ownership is
individual, or sole proprietorship. This is a business owned by
one person.
The advantages of individual ownership include a person’s
ability to have direct control over a business and to be the sole
recipient of the profits. Also, there are fewer laws regulating
individual businesses. Disadvantages include being responsible
for all business debts and expenses and finding it difficult to
expand if finances are limited. Individual businesses usually
are small and provide either services or goods (retail).
A sole proprietorship might be you starting a lawn care
service. You would use your money to buy a lawn mower, edger,
hedge trimmers, and other supplies. Then you would open for
business and seek out customers, possibly starting out in your
neighborhood, and begin mowing lawns as soon as you have
clients, or customers. You could start applying the income you
made to pay for expenses, such as purchasing equipment. After
paying for initial costs and the ongoing expense of replenishing
supplies and maintaining your equipment, the money left over
would be your profit.
Partnerships usually are larger businesses than
sole proprietorships because the partners can
pool financial resources and use their expertise
to divide responsibilities.


32 AMERICAN BUSINESS
How Businesses are Organized.
A partnership is an association formed by two or more
people who operate a business as co-owners. Two common types
of partnerships are “general” and “limited.” A general partner is
involved in the operation of a business and is responsible for its
debts. A limited partner invests in a business, but isn’t involved
in its daily operation.
Take your lawn care service as an example: If you and a
friend pooled your money to start the business and shared duties,
expenses, and profits, then you would have a general partnership.
If your friend is good at hedge trimming, he or she would be in
charge of that particular service. You might be good at dealing
with people, so you would build your customer base to increase
income. The downside to partnerships is that if one partner makes
mistakes or is irresponsible, it could damage the business and the
partnership. For instance, if your friend is unreliable and doesn’t
show up to help mow a lawn, then all the work would fall on you,
and you would get behind in your service to customers. So part-
nerships need to be formed carefully.
You can use your lawn care service as an example of a
limited partnership, too. If your parent or guardian helped by
giving you some of the money to start, with expectations of
being paid back and gaining a percentage of the profits but
without doing any actual work, you formed a version of a
limited partnership with them.
A corporation is a legal entity recognized as a single body
with its own powers and responsibilities that are separate from
those of the individual members. As a result, a corporation is able
to continue indefinitely even though ownership and employees
might change. Corporations create shares of stock that are sold to
the initial owners and investors. But corporations are not limited
to large companies. Many small firms and even individuals, such
as professional athletes and entertainers, are incorporated—that is,
they have formed a corporation.
Investors can easily buy and sell stocks through stock
exchanges, and when they buy, they own part of the corporation
In joint ventures, individuals or businesses agree to
create a single business project. For example, Acme A
Inc. might join with Acme B Inc. to form a joint venture
named Acme C Inc. to produce a particular product that
neither Acme A nor Acme B produces.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 33
and become stockholders. However, they have limited liability,
or responsibility—they cannot lose more than what they have
already invested if the corporation goes out of business or is
sued. In addition, they are paid dividends, or shares of the profit,
if the corporation is successful and stock prices rise.
By offering stock, corporations are able to raise capital for
business expansion. As long as people are willing to buy the
stock, the corporation has more money available than a sole
proprietorship or a partnership. Stockholders may vote for the
corporation’s managing body, called the board of directors, which
then decides who will oversee the operation of the business.
In addition to selling shares of stock, corporations can
obtain capital by issuing bonds, which are written promises
to pay a specific amount of money at a certain date in the
future. Corporations can also raise capital through the process
of borrowing from a variety of financial institutions and
might consider reinvesting a portion of their profits back into
the corporation. This may result in a lower dividend for the
shareholders but could lead to a rise in the value of the stock.
A limited liability company, or “LLC,” is a legal business
entity that combines the limited liability features of a corporation
with the operational flexibility of a sole proprietorship or a
partnership. For these reasons, LLCs are attractive to many
small-business owners. Owners of an LLC are called members.
LLC members create a limited liability company agreement,
or operating agreement, and agree to the rights, roles, and
responsibilities of the members in how the business of the LLC
operates. Members of an LLC can agree to manage the business
like a partnership or like a corporation with designated officers
and/or a board of managers. Members contribute money as
capital to the LLC and receive a percentage of the profits from
the business. Like corporations, members have limited liability
and cannot lose more than what they have already invested if the
LLC goes out of business or is sued.
Depending on how a business is organized, there are
many variations for the types of taxation and liabilities
that a business owner must face. Tax laws change
frequently, so it is always in a business owner’s best
interest to consult a professional accountant who is
familiar with the laws for the state where the business
is established. For liabilities, it’s best to turn to a lawyer
who is knowledgeable about business structures.
.How Businesses are Organized





AMERICAN BUSINESS 35
.Important Factors of Business
Important Factors
of Business
There are several important factors for businesses to consider:
customers, competition, profits, sustainability, property,
contracts, financial statements, and business ethics.
Customers
There is an old expression in business that says the customer
is always right. The idea is that if businesses are to succeed,
they need to have customers to buy their goods or services. So
businesses try to keep customers happy in hopes of cultivating
repeat business because businesses need a continuing income
from continuing sales. That makes customers the most important
people to a company. If you opened a lawn care service, you
would try your best to please your customers so that they would
continue to use your services season after season.
Pay attention to how you and your family are treated when
you go to a restaurant. If you like the service, chances are you
will go back to that restaurant. However, if the waiter or waitress
is rude, slow, or disinterested, you probably won’t go back.
Or, say you took your lawn mower to a shop for a midseason
tune-up, but it wasn’t ready as promised. You probably would
use another company next time. While the people for whom you
provide lawn care are your customers, you are a customer of the
company that fixes and maintains lawn equipment.
Without customers
and income, the
business cannot
pay its bills, and
it will fail.


36 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Important Factors of Business.
Sylvia Woods
Sylvia Woods, who came from the cotton fields of South Carolina,
began a restaurant that has become a soul food institution in New York
City’s Harlem.
Although Woods passed away in 2012, her legacy lives on with
family members who continue to operate the well-known eatery. Sylvia’s
Restaurant was so famous that people began calling Woods the Queen
of Soul Food. She had always loved to cook. She used old family recipes
to develop her homemade-style food that brought her so much success.
However, it was the way she treated her customers—with respect and
concern—that kept customers coming back. She often sat down with
them to visit, and greeted many by their first names.
Woods bought her restaurant in 1962 with money that her mother
received for selling the family farm. What began as a small luncheonette
with a seating capacity of 35 grew into a landmark where people from all
walks of life—politicians, celebrities, and nearby residents—went for
a taste of authentic Southern soul food.
The business has
grown to a restaurant
that occupies most of a
city block and seats 450.
Sylvia’s has franchises in
several airports. Sylvia
Woods showed what hard
work, determination, and
a family’s love and respect
can achieve.
Sylvia Woods (standing) and her family made
Sylvia’s Restaurant in New York City the eating
establishment for authentic Southern soul food
such as smothered chicken and collard greens.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 37
.Important Factors of Business
Competition
One of the driving forces of capitalism, as in sports, is competition,
which means to do something with the goal of outperforming
others. Competition exists in almost every aspect of business. In
sports, those who outperform their competition win. In business,
the one that outperforms others usually grows and succeeds.
Competition is based on freedom of choice and begins when
businesses offer products or services, and customers have the
choice of buying or not buying. To attract customers, a business
will try to offer the best product or service at the best price.
If customers don’t buy, the business must improve the
product or service, lower prices, or go out of business. If
customers buy, the business profits and is able to continue. If
the business enjoys great success, rivals probably will emerge
because they believe they can capture some of the market. Rivals
may offer similar products for better prices. So the first business
must continue to improve, be more efficient, and consider
strategies such as lowering prices.
For example, if you mowed the average 1,000-square-foot
lawn for $25, and attracted many customers, a neighbor might
decide to start a lawn care service, too. For a lawn the same
size, the neighbor—now your competitor—charges only $20.
You may have to lower your prices or offer more services for
the $25, or risk losing customers to your neighbor. Customers
will look for the best value and service their money can buy.
But customer behavior is difficult to predict because people
like different things. That’s why they buy different cars of differ-
ent colors, and different clothes, video games, etc. Some might
buy the most inexpensive product even if the quality is not as
good as a more expensive product. Others want the best prod-
uct and better service, even if it costs more. Some like a par-
ticular brand name but still might switch for a better bargain.
Businesses often use advertising to attract customers
to their product or service. They try to portray their
product or service as better, cheaper, newer, improved,
safer, fancier, and so on. While this is one way to lure
customers away from competition, the company must
be careful not to exaggerate too much or it could turn
customers off.
Competition is a
key force behind
capitalism. It
drives companies
to do better.
That may mean
producing a better
product for the
money, provid-
ing more variety,
creating a unique
product or service,
serving a niche
market, or any
number of
elements that
make a company’s
product or service
stand out from
the rest.


38 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Important Factors of Business.
The Profit Motive
When a business opens, its goal or motive is to earn a profit. A
motive is a reason for doing something. For example, earning
money to live a better life is a motive for people to work. Profit—
the money left over after paying bills and wages—is an essential
competitive feature of buying and selling in the economic system.
The opposite of profit is loss. Loss occurs when it costs
more to produce products or provide a service than a company
is able to make from sales. In free enterprise, the desire to make
profits to benefit the company or for personal gain is called the
profit motive.
The ability to earn profits sets the American business
system apart from other government-controlled economic
systems. In some of these societies, making profits might be
considered wrong. But without a profit motive, businesses and
individuals lose much of their incentive to invent and improve
upon products and services, offer them at the best prices, and
continue producing. Profits motivate people to improve their
quality of life and buy products they need and want. So, when
you read or hear that a company made a $1 million profit, keep
in mind that the profit benefits the people who work there,
those who have invested in the company, and even customers
who can feel confident buying from the company.
Where Does Profit Come From?
Now that you know what profit is, let’s learn more about where
it comes from. Using a fictitious automaker called American Auto
as an example, let’s find out how to determine the cost of making
1,000 cars that were sold in the last year and how much, if any,
profit was earned. American Auto’s accountant, a person who
keeps track of a company’s financial transactions, would do this by
preparing a profit-and-loss statement. This statement would show
total income from sales, total cost to produce the cars, and the dif-
ference of the two to determine either the profit or the loss for a
particular period.
So let’s take the role of the accountant. You determine that
the 1,000 cars sold for $15,000 each. Thus, the income from
sales was $15 million. Production costs include wages paid to
employees who make the cars and manage the business, the
materials used to make the cars, supplies, utilities, advertising,
and taxes. Overhead costs include expenses not directly related
to making the product, such as rent, insurance, telephone, taxes,
heating and air conditioning, and so on.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 39
.Important Factors of Business
Most of these costs are used up during production. Materials,
supplies, and utilities must be bought and/or replenished as cars
are built. Labor is a continuing cost because employees are paid
during production. In a way, even taxes are used up because that,
too, must be paid at scheduled times.
Another cost is depreciation, which is the cost of wear and
tear on tools and machines, and the cost of repairing or replacing
them. Depreciation allows a company to spread the cost of the
tools and machines over the years of their usefulness. For example,
say the company knows that all its tools or machines will last
exactly 10 years before needing to be replaced. Each year, then,
American Auto allocates (or sets aside) one-tenth of the original
cost of its tools as a cost of operating. This reduces the amount
of profit that is subject to taxation, thus increasing the profit,
which can be distributed as dividends to stockholders. In an
actual company, of course, each tool and machine would have
a different lifespan.
The accountant gathers the figures and compiles the profit-
and-loss statement. A simplified version might look like this:
American Auto Company
Profit-and-Loss Statement
For Month/Day/Year to Month/Day/Year
Revenue
Income from Sales $15,000,000.00
Expenses (Minus
cost of production)
Labor $6,000,000.00
Materials, supplies,
utilities
$5,000,000.00
Overhead $200,000.00
Depreciation $300,000.00
Total cost of production
before taxes
$11,500,000.00
Profit before taxes $3,500,000.00
Taxes $1,000,000.00
Net income (Profit) $2,500,000.00


40 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Important Factors of Business.
Income exceeded expenses, so the company earned a profit.
But where does the profit go? A company’s earnings belong
to the stockholders of the company. That’s because investors
“loaned” the company money when they bought the company’s
stock. They bought the stock because they were confident the
company would be successful and expected their loan to earn
dividends. The company pays back investors by issuing what is
called dividends, which are distributed from the profit.
Profits are distributed to investors in cash or reinvested
back into the company (to be discussed later). Stockholders
receive shares of the profit because they took a risk when they
invested. Competitive business can be risky because it is hard to
predict whether customers will buy a company’s product. Even
long-established companies might not earn profits every year, so
investment in new companies poses even bigger risks.
If American Auto were a new company, no one would know
whether the public might like its cars. If the public does like
them, the company will sell lots of cars and make a profit. If
the public doesn’t like them, fewer cars will be sold than the
number needed to offset the production costs, and the company
will post a loss. As long as the company earns a profit, it can pay
its stockholders dividends. If there is a loss, stockholders might
be paid only a small dividend, or none at all.
If a company can’t cover its production costs, it will need to
make cost-saving moves, such as selling off machinery, laying off
workers, and delaying payments to suppliers. Continued losses
could mean that the company will go out of business and the
stockholders will lose their investments.
Why might investors want to risk investing in a company
rather than putting the money in a savings account, where the
money would earn interest and be safe? Because, after studying
the company’s profit-and-loss statements and its prospects for
future growth, people believe the company will prosper. Investors
expect a better return on their money than what they could expect
to gain elsewhere. People’s willingness to invest in companies
can be seen as another tool to create jobs and savings for more
investments, and to keep American business going and growing.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 41
.Important Factors of Business
Where Does Profit Go?
When companies need more money to grow, they issue (release)
stock, or shares of the company. Investors can buy the stock, mak-
ing them among the company’s owners. They will be issued stock
certificates that specify the number of shares they own. Say a com-
pany issues 100 shares of stock at $10 a share. If 10 people each
buy 10 shares, each will have invested $100 in the business and will
be called a stockholder, or shareholder. A stockholder owns shares
of the stock, which represent capital (money) in the company.
In most companies, several people are elected by the stock-
holders to be on the board of directors, which oversees the
business. Because the directors are elected, they can be replaced
if the stockholders don’t like the way they are running the com-
pany. Stockholders owning more shares have more votes. For
instance, if someone owned 20 shares of the company that issued
100 shares, that person would have twice as many votes as a
shareholder who owned 10 shares.
One duty of the board of directors is to decide what happens
to company profits. One option is to divide the profit among
shareholders according to the number of shares each share-
holder owns and then mail dividend checks to the shareholders.
However, the board of directors must take into consideration
the company’s future. Part of that consideration is to make sure
the company has savings to use when needed. If part of the
company’s profit can be saved, then everyone—stockholders
and employees—will benefit.
Stock certificate


42 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Important Factors of Business.
First, a company needs more money to maintain its supply
of tools, which wear out or break. A company will eventually
have to replace the tools and, due to inflation, the replacements
might cost more than the original tools. Basically, inflation causes
prices to rise. A tool that originally cost $5,000 might cost $7,000
to replace. That means the company will need to make a larger
investment just to stay where it is.
But a company wants to grow and improve its products or
services, or else it might lose customers. Developing or improving
products and services costs money because research and new tools
are needed. A company could issue more stock to raise money,
but present stockholders might want to supply the needed capital
because they believe in the company’s success. Stockholders
supply the capital by reinvesting part of the company’s profit—
dividends—which allows the company to fund increased costs.
So the directors might decide to distribute part of the
company’s profit in cash and reinvest the rest in the company.
This would increase the company’s capital and each shareholder’s
investment. Stockholders would still get their share of the profit,
but some of the profit would be in cash and the rest would be in
added investment.
This stock certificate for Ford Motor Company was issued to
Henry Ford II, the founder’s grandson, who ran the company
from 1945 to 1979.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 43
.Important Factors of Business
Profits Make Companies Grow
The more profit a company can make, the more money its
shareholders can reinvest. The more money that is reinvested
increases the company’s ability to produce better products
or services, attract more customers, increase income from
sales, create more positions, and make a larger profit for the
next year.
By being profitable, more people might be willing to invest
in the company, which gives the company even more capital and
makes it easier to borrow money, if needed. All of these things—
more reinvestment, more new investment, and more borrowing
power—make it easier for the company to grow and succeed.
A profitable company helps other companies enjoy the
same type of success. This happens because the profitable
company is able to hire more people, buy more materials from
other companies, and upgrade its equipment when necessary.
Because it is buying from other companies, those companies
grow also.
Sustainability
In recent times, the word “sustainable” has been associated
with two distinct meanings in business. The first, and perhaps
original meaning, has to do with long-term viability or surviv-
ability of a business. The second, and now more common
meaning, is about the management of limited natural resources.
Sustainable Business Practices
Because sustainable business practices have to do with the
survivability of a business, ethical business practices should be
considered. First, care of natural resources is important because
if a business runs out of a resource that is essential in manufac-
turing its product, the business cannot survive. Second, care of
employees and customers is necessary. Companies must treat
their employees ethically through the use of unbiased hiring
and compensation practices, or they may find that no one will
By giving the company access to more money to
develop and produce better products, the stockholders
have increased the likelihood of the company’s future
profitability. That would mean higher dividends and an
increase in stockholder investments.


44 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Important Factors of Business.
be willing to work for them. Also, customers should never be in
any danger by using a business’s product.
Companies also have an obligation to their investors and/
or owners, as well as to government agencies and society.
For-profit companies have an obligation to their owners and
investors to earn a profit. Of course, this profit should not
be earned at any cost but should be earned ethically and in
consideration of natural resources, people, etc. Companies
are also responsible for representing themselves accurately to
government agencies, such as the Internal Revenue Service in
the collection of fair taxes and the Environmental Protection
Agency to avoid pollution as much as possible.
Understanding Green Marketing
We are green. This company is socially responsible. That
product is environmentally friendly. Our business efforts are
sustainable. These concepts have become integral parts of orga-
nizational operations and marketing strategies. Sustainability,
the most current and all-encompassing term, has been defined
as an organization’s effort to meet corporate objectives and con-
sumer needs in a way that demonstrates continuous improve-
ment toward minimizing negative impact on people and the
natural environment.
The term “green marketing” is a colloquial one that may
have been coined by Jacquelyn Ottman, author of the book
Green Marketing, in the early 1980s. The term describes a
company’s efforts to address what is more scientifically termed
“sustainability and corporate social responsibility.” The phrase
has also been used to describe all manner of commitment (or
lack thereof) to sustainability efforts.
It is true that consumers are fickle and social attitudes
toward sustainability may take a back seat to concerns such as
terrorism and the economy, but the practices that have already
been integrated into industries at all levels cannot be easily
changed if efforts to be more sustainable have been made in
good faith.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 45
.Important Factors of Business
Private Property and Contracts
Among the reasons so many people come to the United States
from other countries are the freedoms enjoyed by Americans,
which include the right to own property.
During most of history, personal property, such as horses,
jewelry, and clothing, had been of minor importance in com-
parison to land ownership. There was little regulation over the
ownership, sale, transfer, and inheritance of personal property,
although land ownership was greatly restricted by governments
or ruling families. However, the Industrial Revolution changed
this attitude. With the establishment of companies and revenue-
producing stocks, personal property became important.
Being Accountable to the Environment
Thriving business produces waste and uses resources. Whether it’s an
oil company processing finite reserves of oil or a company that uses pack-
aging, businesses have considerable impact on the environment.
The challenge is to reduce the impact on the environment while keep-
ing costs low. Many businesses have resisted environmentally friendly
practices because they believe it costs too much. But as Americans
become more conscientious, many consumers expect companies to
improve upon their environmental record. For instance, product packaging
produces waste. The challenge is to develop less wasteful, recyclable pack-
aging that is attractive and also less costly.
Furthermore, businesses that use or sell large amounts of motor
oil, cooking oil, tires, batteries, toner cartridges, and other products that
contain hazardous materials must collect and properly dispose of these
products. The time it takes to organize the disposal, the method used, and
the materials needed to do it are costs (expenses) these businesses must
factor into their budgets.
Other measures, such as reducing paper use and conserving
electricity, save money. Any business should explore cost-saving,
environmentally friendly measures when planning its budget.


46 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Important Factors of Business.
Until recently, and even today in some countries, the average
person was limited by law or custom to the amounts and kinds
of property he or she could own, buy, inherit, sell, or give away.
In some countries, some people also were and are limited to the
kinds of work he or she could perform. To escape these and other
restrictions (such as religious persecution), millions of people
have come to the United States. Early immigrants cleared land
for farming, started businesses, and began enjoying freedoms and
luxuries they had not been able to enjoy before.
The right to private property let loose a great productive
power in the United States. Workers are not restricted to low
positions, but can advance in their careers and economic
positions. Workers are respected, and they are encouraged to
invest their savings and to become more involved in choosing
government officials.
Freedom vs. License
A U.S. citizen has the legal right to have, use, and
dispose of assets (things of value, including property)
in whatever legal way the person chooses. This is a
basic freedom—along with freedom of religion, speech,
and the press—granted by our Constitution. This makes
our free enterprise system possible because each
person is guaranteed the choice to spend, save, or
invest his or her earnings.
However, the ability to exercise some aspects of
freedom may require license to do so. For instance,
you have the freedom to pursue various occupations,
but you may need a license—permission—from your
state to work as, for example, a teacher, electrician,
barber, security guard, accountant, or paramedic. The
“freedom” you want to exercise may require permis-
sion from your employer or religious organization,
maybe even your school.
The more success
companies have,
the more they
benefit their
communities
because they are
able to create
more positions,
pay better wages,
and produce
more products
for people to buy
and use. All these
things create a
higher standard
of living.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 47
.Important Factors of Business
These opportunities allow most Americans to enjoy a
higher standard of living than people in many other countries
can. Americans enjoy modern homes, cars, utilities, good food,
safe environments in the workplace, clean water, a good high-
way system, and public transportation. Many have savings
accounts, investments, and health and life insurance benefits.
A person who has the right to own private property also has
the right to enter into contracts. A contract is a formal or legally
binding agreement or promise to do, or not do, something in
return for another person’s doing, or not doing, something. For
example, a contract can be signed for the sale of something. One
person agrees with a second person to pay a certain amount for
a product the second person has. The second person agrees to
relinquish ownership and deliver the product upon payment.
Parties cannot enter into a contract for illegal activities. Such a
contract is void.
Another type of contract is a lease or rental agreement. A
renter, tenant, or lessee signs a contract to agree to pay a certain
amount of money each month in return for being allowed to use
land, facilities, or equipment owned by someone else (owner).
If the business leasing or renting doesn’t pay, or if the owner
prevents the use of the property, the injured party can go to court
and force the other to live up to the terms of the contract.
Countries that practice different political philosophies
from what is practiced in the United States have differ-
ent views regarding personal property. For instance,
the Communist doctrine calls for public ownership of
property and for the state (the government) to own
the means of industrial production, which includes
wealth-generating personal property. But most
Communist societies have some private property just
as some capitalist governments own property publicly.


48 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Important Factors of Business.
Many business contracts are formal and complicated. Other
contracts are informal and hardly noticeable. For example, if you
received merchandise from a store and fail to pay, the merchant
can force you to either pay or return the merchandise in good
condition. Every business transaction, from one as simple as
buying a snack to one as complex as a company issuing stock, is
a contract of some type. Contracts are based on trust. Each party
trusts the other to do what he or she has promised.
Financial Statements
What Are Financial Statements?
Financial statements for businesses usually include income
statements, balance sheets, statements of retained earnings, and
statements of cash flows. It is standard practice for businesses
to present financial statements that adhere to generally accepted
accounting principles (GAAP) to maintain continuity of infor-
mation and presentation across international borders. Financial
statements are often audited by government agencies, accoun-
tants, firms, and other entities to ensure accuracy and for tax,
financing, or investing purposes. The three main financial
statements are the balance sheet, income statement, and cash
flow statement.
Balance Sheet
The balance sheet provides an overview of assets, liabilities, and
shareholders’ equity as a snapshot in time. The date at the top of
the balance sheet tells you when the snapshot was taken, which
is generally the end of the fiscal year. The balance sheet equation
is assets equal liabilities plus shareholders’ equity, because assets
are paid for with either liabilities, such as debt, or shareholders’
equity, such as retained earnings and additional paid-in capital.
Assets are listed on the balance sheet in order of liquidity.
Liabilities are listed in the order in which they will be paid.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 49
.Important Factors of Business
Short-term or current liabilities are expected to be paid within the
year, while long-term or noncurrent liabilities are debts expected
to be paid after one year.
Income Statement
Unlike the balance sheet, the income statement covers a range
of time, which is a year for annual financial statements and a
quarter for quarterly financial statements. The income statement
provides an overview of revenues, expenses, net income, and
earnings. It usually provides two to three years or quarters of
data for comparison.
Income Statement
Revenue $ 225,000
Cost of Goods Sold (COGS) $ 76,000
Gross Profit $ 149,000
Expenses
Salaries and Benefits $ 23,000
Rent and Overhead $ 10,000
Depreciation and $ 14,000
Amortization
Interest $ 3,250
Total Expenses $ 50,250
Earnings Before Tax $ 98,750
Taxes $ 1,500
Net Earnings $ 97,250
Balance Sheet
Assets $ 140,000 Liabilities
Cash $ 7,000 Accounts Payable $ 9,250
Accounts Receivable $ 12,000 Debt $ 48,000
Inventory $ 19,000 Total Liabilities $ 57,250
Property and Equipment $ 72,000 Shareholders’ Equity
Total Assets $ 250,000 Equity Capital $ 100,000
Retained Earnings $ 92,750
Shareholders’ Equity $ 192,750
Total Liabilities and
Shareholders’ Equity $ 250,000


50 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Important Factors of Business.
Cash Flow Statement
The cash flow statement merges the balance sheet and the
income statement. Due to accounting conventions, net income
can fall out of alignment with cash flow. The cash flow statement
reconciles the income statement with the balance sheet in three
major business activities: operating, investing, and financing.
Operating activities include cash flows made from regular busi-
ness operations. Investing activities include cash flows due to the
buying and selling of assets such as real estate and equipment.
Financing activities include cash flows from debt and equity. This
is where analysts can also find the amount of dividends paid
and/or the dollar value of shares the company has repurchased.
Cash Flow Statement
Operating Cash Flow
Cash Receipts From Sales $ 140,000
Cash Paid for Expenses $ 30,000
Cash From Operations $ 110,000
Investing Cash Flow
Sale of Property and Equipment $ 40,000
Purchase of Property and Equipment $ 32,500
Cash From Investing $ 7,500
Financing Cash Flow
Borrowing Cash From Bank $ 30,000
Payment on Loans $ 70,000
Cash From Financing $ (40,000)
Net Increase in Cash $ 77,500


AMERICAN BUSINESS 51
.Important Factors of Business
Business Ethics
Investopedia defines business ethics as “the study of
appropriate business policies and practices regarding potentially
controversial subjects including corporate governance, insider
trading, bribery, discrimination, corporate social responsibility,
and fiduciary responsibilities.”
Ethics do not apply only to these high-level areas, however.
At its most basic, ethics are simply a set of moral principles that
guides one’s behavior. On an individual level, these principles
could include honesty, integrity, and respect for others. For a
corporation, those principles could include corporate compliance,
environmental protection, and the way it treats its employees.
Business ethics apply to everyone, whether they work for
themselves or a huge global company.
Laws govern many aspects of running a business, but
business ethics are not just about following the law. Ethical
employees and businesses seek to eliminate conflicts of interest
and try to do what is right.
It is not always easy to do the right thing, but following the
Scout Oath and Scout Law will serve you well.
The first point
of the Scout Law
is “A Scout is
trustworthy.” The
Scout Law, as
everything else in
Scouting, helps
you to become
a responsible
person. Every
businessperson
should be
trustworthy,
thrifty, friendly,
and courteous.


Credit and Banking
Nowadays, Americans are doing more business with credit and
debit cards and using less cash.
Using credit to make purchases and making prompt payments
is an excellent way to establish a good credit rating. Having a good
credit rating is important because it shows that people can trust
you in financial matters. Checks, credit cards, debit cards, loans,
and mortgages are the most common forms of credit.
When you open a checking account at a bank and deposit
money in it, you receive a book of checks. When you pay for
something by check, you sign the check and include the proper
dollar amount along with the name of the person or business
you are paying. When that person or business deposits the
check at a bank, that bank is allowed to transfer the amount of
money that is written on the check from your bank account to
the person’s or business’s account.
A check is a form of cash because it represents an amount
of money you actually possess. But it is safer than cash because
only the person or business to whom you write the check can
cash it and collect the money. When you write a check, most
businesses will want to see some identification to make sure the
check belongs to you. Also, you must have enough money in
your bank account to cover the amount written on the check. If
not, the bank will charge you a fee (called an overdraft charge),
and will return the check to the person or business, who might
charge you a returned-check fee.
If you don’t have enough money in your account to cover
the amount of the check, you have written a bad check. Some
checking accounts offer overdraft protection, so that if you don’t
have the money to cover the check, the bank automatically loans
you the amount needed to pay the person or business. Banks
charge interest for that service, but if the loan is paid back in
a timely manner, it won’t cost as much as the fee for writing
a bad check.
Credit and Banking.
52 AMERICAN BUSINESS


AMERICAN BUSINESS 53
.Credit and Banking
A charge account with a store or other business lets you
pay at a later date for merchandise or services purchased now.
Using a credit card from a store or business shows that you
have a charge account there. Other credit cards issued by banks
and credit card companies can be used in any store that accepts
them. Often, they are accepted worldwide.
Credit cards are swiped through a machine or, if they are
chip-enabled, inserted into a chip reader, which notifies the bank
or credit card company of your purchases. Normally, you have a
credit line, which means you are allowed to charge up to a certain
amount. If you go over that limit, your purchases might be denied
by the store or the bank or credit card company. On a monthly
basis, you will receive a bill for the total amount of charges
you made.
Debit cards are a cross between checks and credit cards.
Like checks, debit cards draw on money you actually have in
your checking account. As such, you have to keep good records
on your spending. However, as cards, they can be used almost
anywhere that accepts credit cards, including foreign countries,
and they are convenient for use at ATMs and for making
online purchases.
To notify the bank or credit card company of your
purchases, credit cards and debit cards are swiped through a
machine or, if they are chip-enabled, inserted into a chip reader.
Increasingly, card information can be stored on a mobile device
and shared securely to make card purchases using biometric
verification (e.g., fingerprint or face identification).
An installment purchase is a type of credit used usually when
buying an expensive item such as a car, washer and dryer, or
television. You sign an installment purchase agreement with the
business, promising to pay a certain amount of money each month
Intentionally writing a bad check and failing to make
good on it is considered theft. If the person or business
that received the bad check files charges, you will have
to pay the amount of the check plus additional fees.
Failure to pay can result in arrest.
If you pay off only part of your credit card balance, you
will be charged interest on the part you didn’t pay, and
it will be added to your next monthly payment.


54 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Credit and Banking.
or week until the bill is paid in
full. The seller adds a service or
interest charge to the price of the
item to allow for this extended
payment privilege. Sometimes it
is cheaper to get a loan through a
bank that charges a lower interest
rate; you can pay off the seller all
at once and make your monthly
payments to the bank.
On some large purchases,
you might have to offer collateral
to the seller. This means that,
to complete the deal, you sign
over to the seller or lender the
ownership of property or goods
that you own. This protects the
seller or lender in case you fail
to repay the loan. If you don’t
repay, the collateral is forfeited
to the lender. If you do repay the loan, you retain ownership of
your collateral.
A mortgage is a type of collateral loan. If you are unable
to pay the full price for a house, a bank or mortgage company
might lend you all or part of the money in return for your signing
a mortgage contract. This contract gives the bank or mortgage
company ownership of the house until you have repaid the loan
according to the terms of the contract. The bank or mortgage
company will charge you interest on the amount of the loan
during the life of the contract.
The federal government also makes available loans to
students for school and to individuals buying homes. The
government has strict laws about who can offer loans and
Money deposited in national banks is insured by the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), a
government agency created under the Banking Act
of 1933 to insure deposits in case a bank fails. The
coverage limit for most deposit accounts is $250,000.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 55
.Credit and Banking
the terms under which they can lend. These laws protect both
the lenders and borrowers.
Banks rely on lending, or offering credit, to earn profits.
Banks provide checking and savings accounts and, besides
loaning money to individuals, loan money to businesses to pay
for large purchases. Lending money to businesses helps them
grow and benefits the entire community.
The money that banks lend is the money being held for
their depositors. When you deposit money in a checking or
savings account, the bank guarantees that you can have it back
when you want it. But while it is at the bank, the bank will lend
the money to other people or businesses and collect interest from
them. This interest is one way the bank produces income so
that it can pay its expenses and pay you interest on your savings
account. The bank’s profits will go to its shareholders.
The United States has a central bank called the Federal
Reserve System. Established by the Federal Reserve Act of 1913,
the Federal Reserve helps keep the country’s financial system
stable. Without regulation, our economy would grow unevenly
and experience wide and frequent swings between economic
depression and prosperity.
The Federal Reserve Board is best known for its influence
on interest rates. It can loosen money supplies by lowering
interest rates, thus making loans more appealing, or it can
tighten the money supply by raising interest rates. Thus, it
manages the amount of money available at any one time in
the United States financial system. The Federal Reserve can
influence money supplies in other ways, too, such as buying
U.S. government securities (stock) or changing the percentage
of deposits that must be maintained on reserve at the Federal
Reserve banks.
You can see that the government can play a big role in
how a bank might conduct business and how much it might
charge for loans. While banks have long offered other services,
such as safe deposit vaults where valuables, such as documents
and jewels, can be stored safely and privately, they also have
expanded services to include individual retirement accounts
and stock investments.





AMERICAN BUSINESS 57
.Money and Inflation
Money and Inflation
Before money became the medium of exchange, people
exchanged goods and services for other goods and services.
This type of transaction is called the barter system. Although
this system is still used in some countries and in some
instances in the United States, most people receive money
for the goods and services they provide. Goods and services
are priced according to the standard of value that money
represents, such as the dollar in the United States.
When prices continually increase for various reasons, the
value, or purchasing power, of money is reduced. This is called
inflation. For example, in the 1970s, a new car might have sold
for $5,000. Today, a new car might sell for $25,000 or much
more. That means the dollar is not worth as much as it was in
1970. For example, if a product doubles in price, then the value
of the dollar has been reduced in half.
There are several causes of inflation. One is called demand-
pull. That’s when total demand exceeds existing supplies, and
people are willing to pay more for the limited amount of goods.
That’s why a popular electronic game system costs more when
first introduced to the public, and the price drops after a while.
Forcing price increases also causes increases in operating and
financing costs and the cost of materials. Demand-pull inflation
increases wages, too, because workers want to maintain their
buying power.
Another explanation is called cost-push, when businesses
raise prices to cover total expenses and to preserve profit
margins. Again, workers will want more money to help
maintain their purchasing power. If these factors continue, the
wage-price spiral continues. Deflation occurs when these spiral


58 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Money and Inflation.
Comparison Shopping in 1992 and 2022
This chart shows what some common items and necessities cost in
1992 and their cost in 2019.
Item Cost in 1992 Cost in 2022
Bacon, 1 lb. $1.87 $7.22
Gasoline, 1 gallon $1.20 $3.52
regular unleaded
White bread, 1 lb. loaf 74 cents $1.55
Ground chuck, 1 lb. $1.91 $5.49
Iceberg lettuce, 1 head 66 cents $1.79
effects are reversed. Another type of cost-push inflation occurs
when a single business or a few businesses control a particular
product or industry. Prices can increase as a result of the
policies and decisions of these groups. When a single business
controls a product or industry, it is called a monopoly. U.S.
antitrust laws help prevent monopolies from forming.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 59
.Money and Inflation
Another theory says that inflation occurs because consumers
expect prices to increase. As a result, a high demand for goods
and services will continue because people believe their purchasing
power is better in the present than it will be in the future.
And workers will demand higher wages so they can meet the
expected increase in prices. When the rate of inflation increases
each year by 10 percent or more, it can damage a country’s
economy. Prices rise faster than wages, the standard of living
might drop, people might quit buying as much, and a recession
or depression might occur.
A cartel is a
type of monopoly
organized by
groups that sell
the same type
of product.
The goal is to
dominate the
market for
that product
by fixing prices
and limiting
competition by
smaller firms.
The inflation rate is measured by a device called an
index, which compares present prices against past
prices. Three well-known ones are the Consumer Price
Index, which measures monthly changes in the prices
of commonly used goods and services; the Standard
and Poor’s 500 Index®, which keeps tabs on top U.S.
corporations; and the Producer Price Index, which
measures the average change over time in selling
prices by domestic producers of goods and services.


60 AMERICAN BUSINESS
U.S. Department of Labor.
U.S. Department
of Labor
The Department of Labor (DOL) was established by President
William Taft on March 4, 1913. The DOL is a federal agency
whose mission is to “foster, promote, and develop the welfare of
the wage earners, job seekers, and retirees of the United States;
improve working conditions; advance opportunities for profit-
able employment; and assure work-related benefits and rights,”
according to its website. With the changing work environment,
including the use of technology, the agency must create labor
laws to create a safer and fair workplace for both the employee
and the employer. Although the agency has enforced thousands of
regulations, the following are among the most notable.
Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)
The Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) prescribes standards for
wages and overtime pay, which affect most private and public
employment. The act is administered by the Wage and Hour
Division. It requires employers to pay covered employees who
are not otherwise exempt at least the federal minimum wage and
overtime pay of 1½ times the regular rate of pay. For nonagricul-
tural operations, it restricts the hours that children under age 16
can work and forbids the employment of children under age 18 in
certain jobs deemed too dangerous. For agricultural operations, it
prohibits the employment of children under age 16 during school
hours and in certain jobs deemed too dangerous.
Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSH Act)
The Occupational Safety and Health (OSH) Act is administered
by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA).
Safety and health conditions in most private industries are regulat-
ed by OSHA or OSHA-approved state programs, which also cover
public sector employers. Employers covered by the OSH Act must


comply with the regulations and the safety and health standards
put forth by OSHA. Employers also have a general duty under the
OSH Act to provide their employees with work and a workplace
free from recognized, serious hazards. OSHA enforces the act
through workplace inspections and investigations. Compliance
assistance and other cooperative programs are also available.
Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
Administered by the Wage and Hour Division, the Family and
Medical Leave Act (FMLA) requires employers with 50 or more
employees to give up to 12 weeks of unpaid, job-protected leave
to eligible employees for the birth or adoption of a child or for
the serious illness of the employee or a spouse, child, or parent.
Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)
The Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA) regu-
lates employers that offer pension or welfare benefit plans
for their employees. Title I of ERISA is administered by the
Employee Benefits Security Administration and imposes a wide
range of requirements on those responsible for pension and
welfare benefit plans and on others having dealings with these
plans. These provisions preempt many similar state laws. Under
Title IV, certain employers and plan administrators must fund
an insurance system to protect certain kinds of retirement ben-
efits, with premiums paid to the federal government’s Pension
Benefit Guaranty Corporation.
.U.S. Department of Labor
AMERICAN BUSINESS 61





AMERICAN BUSINESS 63
.Insurance
Insurance
Throughout history, people have tried to protect themselves
against trouble, famine, and disease by offering gifts to gods
and other spirits. In modern times, there are more proven ways
to avoid trouble. People can now buy insurance to help reduce
financial losses from fire, theft, injury, some of the risks faced
in everyday life, and death.
People buy insurance contracts—policies—from a variety
of sources. In industrialized countries, most everyone has some
type of insurance. Some laws require car owners to buy insurance
before driving on public roads. Lenders, such as banks, require
anyone seeking a loan for the purchase of a car or home to also
purchase insurance for the property.
Although insurance cannot prevent accidents and calamities
from happening, it can help reduce each person’s risk of
financial loss. It does this by applying the law of probability—
a mathematical certainty that a definite number of people will
suffer a certain kind of loss within a given time frame.
For example, say there are 1,000 homes in a neighborhood,
each worth $120,000. History might show that an average of one
house per 1,000 has been destroyed by fire each year, making it
probable that one house will again burn each year in the future.
No one knows which house, and none of the homeowners can
afford to keep $120,000 on hand just in case it might be needed
to rebuild the house. Instead, each of the 1,000 homeowners
puts a certain amount of money into a fire insurance fund. If one
house burns, that fund is used to help rebuild the house. That
way, everyone is protected from a financial loss due to fire, with
the cost to each homeowner being relatively small.
Business partners often take out life insurance on each
other to make sure their business will succeed if one
partner should die.


64 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Insurance.
Insurance companies function in much the same way. They
collect fees, or premiums, from people who might share the same
type of risk, and then they pay out agreed-upon amounts to those
who suffer that kind of loss. Premiums are determined with
the help of experts called actuaries. Actuaries apply theories of
probability and assemble statistics about past losses to calculate
what future losses might be. On the basis of these statistics,
rates for various types of insurance are determined along with
the amount of money the insurance company needs to have in
reserve to settle expected claims.
Fire insurance actuaries are calculated on factors such as the
number of recent fires in a community; the dollar loss from each
fire; the age of the insured building; the building’s material, such
as wood or brick; its location, and how close a fire station is.
Many companies will buy insurance on the lives
of important employees. They do this because
the unexpected death of a company officer could
force the company to change important plans for
its future.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 65
.Insurance
The cost of premiums for insurance against theft are based
on the value of the insured article or articles, its attractiveness
to thieves, and whether something is kept in a bank vault or at
home. Most individuals and businesses carry insurance against
the risk of financial losses from fire and theft.
Life insurance pays a sum of money to a person’s beneficiary
or beneficiaries (those who have been named to receive payment)
after the person dies. Beneficiaries usually are members of the
insured person’s family. The premiums for life insurance again are
determined by probability. Actuaries determine the life expectancy
of a person. Because a younger person is expected to live longer
than an older one and will be able to pay more premiums, the
premiums for a younger person will be cheaper.
Liability insurance protects a person or company against
claims by someone who is injured on the person’s or
company’s property, or injured as a result of malpractice.
Doctors, psychologists, and other health professionals
purchase liability insurance.
Automobile insurance can cover many risks, such as
damage from collision, fire, and theft, and accident liability.
Most auto policies include deductibles. For example, if a policy
has a $200 deductible, the car owner would pay the first $200
to have anything repaired from an accident, theft, or fire. The
insurance company would pay the rest of the expense. Having a
deductible will lower the premium. The higher the deductible,
the lower the premium will be, but the more the person will
pay in times of loss.
Premiums for medical and hospital expenses are determined
by the cost of the care that the policyholder and his or her family
members—dependents—are likely to need. Most policies cover
only certain medical and hospital expenses and limit the length
of time during which such charges will be paid. A big change in
the health-care industry began in the 1980s, when many people
switched from fee-for-service plans to managed care services.
Many employers began offering their employees managed care
plans because these plans emphasized preventive care and were
generally less expensive. There are a variety of managed care plans
available that offer both flexibility and savings for the employee
and employer.


66 AMERICAN BUSINESS
Insurance.
Most employers also are required by law to carry insurance
to protect their employees against certain losses from on-the-job
accidents, illness, or unemployment. This accident and health
insurance is called workers’ compensation and often is handled
by the state government rather than an insurance company.
Injured workers are entitled to receive benefits until they recover.
If they suffer permanent disability and are unable to work, or
are killed while working, they or their dependents receive
lifelong benefits.
Many insurance companies sell several types of annuities,
which are like savings accounts. The insured person pays
premiums or provides a lump sum to an annuity. In return,
the insurance company pays the person a fixed annuity
(income) for a certain number of years, depending on the
type of annuity the person has. Many people purchase
annuities as a way to save for retirement. Businesses also
purchase annuities to pay pensions to retired employees.
Many employers
pay all or most
of the insurance
premium for their
employees. This
is considered an
employee benefit.
Social Security is a type of annuity program
administered by the federal government. Employees
and employers pay equal contributions to the
government, based on an employee’s rate of pay. The
government issues a Social Security number to each
person to track earnings and tax payments. One can
begin drawing Social Security at age 62 but needs to
be at least 67 years old, if born after 1960, to collect
the full retirement benefit. The amount is based on the
person’s rate of pay and how long the person worked.
A person also can collect benefits before retirement
age if the person becomes disabled and can no longer
work. Social Security covers most workers in the United
States, as well as their spouses, widows or widowers,
and dependent children.
Unemployment insurance pays a fixed amount of
money each week for a limited time to people who
were dismissed through no fault of their own. People
receiving such benefits are required to seek other
employment while drawing payments.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 67
.Insurance
Insurance companies lead campaigns to reduce or elim-
inate accidents on the highway, in homes, and at work.
Fewer accidents help companies keep premiums low.
In more recent times, government-provided medical insur-
ance—Medicare for the elderly and Medicaid for the needy—has
been added and is under the direction of the U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services.
Insurance is a critical element of American business. Besides
calculating probable losses, collecting premiums, and handling
claims, insurance companies invest to earn dividends and
interest, which helps lower premium rates. They also help pay
for new housing, and educational and environmental projects.


68 AMERICAN BUSINESS
American Business Resources.
American Business Resources
Scouting Literature
American Labor, Citizenship in the
Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Communication, Digital Technology,
Entrepreneurship, Law, Personal
Management, and Salesmanship
merit badge pamphlets
Books
American Bar Association Staff. The
American Bar Association Legal
Guide for Small Business, 2nd
edition. Random House
Reference, 2010.
Bossidy, Larry, and Ram Charan.
Execution: The Discipline of Getting
Things Done, revised edition.
Random House Business
Books, 2011.
Covey, Sean. The 7 Habits of Highly
Effective Teens. Touchstone, 2014.
Culligan, Judy. Tycoons and
Entrepreneurs. MacMillan
Reference Books, 1998.
Hardemann, Susie Vaccaro. Stock
Market Knowledge for All Ages.
Ten Speed Press, 2004.
Lichtenstein, Nelson. State of the Union:
A Century of American Labor, revised
and expanded edition. Princeton
University Press, 2013.
McCormick, Anita Louise. The Industrial
Revolution in American History.
Enslow, 1998.
National Association of Investors
Corporation. Investing in Your
Future, 2nd edition. South-Western
Educational Publishing, 2007.
Norman, Jan. What No One Ever
Tells You About Starting Your Own
Business, 2nd edition. Kaplan
Business, 2004.
Peters, Thomas J., and Robert H.
Waterman Jr. In Search of Excellence:
Lessons From America’s Best-Run
Companies. HarperBusiness, 2004.
Serwer, Andy, ed. American Enterprise:
A History of Business in America.
Smithsonian Books, 2015.
Thiel, Peter, and Blake Masters. Zero
to One: Notes on Startups, or How to
Build the Future. Crown
Business, 2014.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 69
.American Business Resources
Organizations and Websites
BetterInvesting
P.O. Box 220
Royal Oak, MI 48068
Toll-free telephone: 877-275-6242
betterinvesting.org
International Association of
Better Business Bureaus
3033 Wilson Blvd., Suite 600
Arlington, VA 22201
bbb.org
Investopedia
investopedia.com
Junior Achievement My Way
(Student Resources)
jamyway.org
National Endowment for Financial
Education
1331 17th St., Suite 1200
Denver, CO 80202
Telephone: 303-741-6333
nefe.org
U.S. Department of Labor
200 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington DC, 20210
Toll-free telephone: 866-487-2365
dol.gov
Acknowledgments
For reviewing and suggesting
updates to this edition of this pamphlet,
Scouting America thanks the following
individuals:
Joseph Kulwicki, Eagle Scout and
finance strategic business partner for NSF
International; David Ehrlich, Eagle Scout
and director of education for the NTEA–
The Association for the Work Truck
Industry in Farmington Hills, Michigan;
and Dr. Gregory S. Black, Eagle Scout,
Scoutmaster, chair of the Department
of Marketing at Metropolitan State
University of Denver, and past president
of the Marketing Educators’ Association.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Ford Motor Co., courtesy—cover (stock
certificate on right); page 42
Kansas State Historical Society,
courtesy—page 14
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—page
18 (Henry Ford)
Ohio State University,
history.ohio-state.edu,
courtesy—page 26
Wikimedia.org/Freshwater and Marine
Image Bank, courtesy—page 13
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 18 (1913
auto factory) and 21 (Bill Gates)
Wikipedia.org/SpreeTom, courtesy—
cover (stock certificate on left);
page 41
Sylvia Woods family, courtesy—page 36
All photos and illustrations not men-
tioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Gene Daniels—page 62 (sailboat)
Daniel Giles—page 30
Steve Seeger—page 62 (fishing)


Notes


Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with
Scout Life magazine’s Merit Badge Minute.
You can learn about different merit badges in every
issue. Plus, the magazine is loaded with outdoor
adventure, games and comics, leadership
tips, life skills, stories about other Scouts
and more. It’s just what
you need to succeed.
UP YOUR
MERIT BADGE
GAME
Subscribe today at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to
get a special
print + digital bundle offer
priced just for Scouts!