THEATER


THEATER
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Theater or check Scoutbook for the
latest requirements.
35959
ISBN 978-0-8395-3328-3
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


THEATER 3





THEATER 5
Contents
Curtain Going Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Critical Thinking Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Writing a One-Act Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Acting a Part . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Directing a Play . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Designing a Set . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Building Scenery . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Lighting the Stage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Designing Costumes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Using Stage Makeup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
What’s Next?. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Theater Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90


6 THEATER
Curtain Going Up.
Curtain Going Up
Everybody loves a live show. We feel a thrill of excitement as
the house lights in the theater dim to black and the curtain
rises on a stage play. Excitement in the audience runs like an
electric current through the crowd and is, indeed, felt by the
actors and crew members backstage as they wait in the wings.
That is the beauty of live theater. It is not like watching
a movie on the big screen or on TV. Live theater is three-
dimensional and interactive. The actors feed off the audience’s
reactions and, if the play is done well, the audience will
become intricately involved with the characters and their
actions on the stage. These are real people up there under
the bright lights, putting their talents on the line to bring you
a live performance.
Of course, sometimes we are disappointed in a stage
performance. Maybe the plot was ridiculous or the actors
seemed wooden. Maybe the words—the dialogue—seemed
stilted and not what real people would say. Or perhaps the
lighting was off mark or the costuming was not in keeping
with the historical period being depicted.
To earn the Theater merit badge, you will get to express
your opinion as a theater critic and go behind the footlights to
see the view from the other side. What you will find backstage
If you can, go see a live theatrical performance of a
play. If your town does not have professional theater
or if the ticket prices for a show featuring paid, pro-
fessional actors and expensive staging are too steep,
go see a community or college theater production.
Amateur theater is often surprisingly good and
involves the talents and volunteer skills of many
people to make the magic happen.


THEATER 7
.Curtain Going Up
is that a lot of fun goes into making the illusion the audience
sees. Theater also takes an enormous amount of hard work
and creative imagination. Seeing a live play without knowing
what’s going on backstage is almost like seeing the tip of a
huge iceberg from a ship. Much more goes on in theater than
ever meets the audience’s eye.
You will learn firsthand how a play is put together by
writing a one-act play yourself and taking part in a production
either on stage as an actor or backstage as a director or crew
member. You will discover the art of communicating silently
as a mime. You also will pick up some of the specialized
language of theater. For instance, when a scene calls for an
actor to “exit stage right,” that means the actor will leave the
stage to his or her right as viewed when facing the audience.
Stage directions
are always given
from the actor’s
perspective to
make them easier
for the performers
to follow. The
stage as seen
through the
audience’s
perspective,
from the house
or seating area
of the theater, is
called house right
and house left.





THEATER 9
.Critical Thinking Skills
Critical Thinking Skills
Many newspapers, as well as television and radio stations,
employ people called critics. These people are specialists who
review a special preview or opening night of a movie, play,
live music performance, or art show. The critic describes the
strong and weak points of a play, movie, musical performance,
or art exhibit at the beginning of its run so that readers or
listeners will have an idea whether they want to see it.
To fulfill requirement 1, you must view a play as a critic
would. You will find that thinking critically about a play will
teach you a great deal about theater. First, consider all the
elements that go into putting a play together. The director,
whom an audience never sees, has coached the actors through
each scene, telling them where to stand and how to best deliver
their lines. A large degree of a play’s success rests on the
shoulders of the director and the actors.
Many other facets of a play can make it shine or sink it
faster than a rock. These are called production values. Lighting,
costume design, props, and stage scenery or scenic design all
contribute to or can detract from the overall impressions you
will glean from watching a play as a critic.
This is not to say you should not expect a few things to
go wrong when you are watching a preview or opening night
performance of a live play. Sometimes a piece of scenery not
properly anchored to the stage will fall over right in the middle
of a performance, creating a jarring effect. Sometimes a prop
will not work right, like a phone an actor is supposed to pick
up that does not ring at the right time. Actors are trained to
work through these glitches and continue their performance
without skipping a beat. Remember, in the best tradition of
theater, regardless of what happens, “The show must go on.”
In your review
of a live play,
you may want to
mention whatever
problems occurred
on stage. However,
as a critical thinker,
pay attention to
how the actors
deal with the
situation. Offer a
bit of praise if
they rise above
the problem.


10 THEATER
Critical Thinking Skills.
Taking Notes
When experiencing the exhilaration of live theater with an
audience around you, make sure you have a small, hand-sized
notebook and a couple of pencils or pens with you as you
watch the performance.


THEATER 11
.Critical Thinking Skills
Assessing the Show
If you are in a theater in front of live performers, be as quiet
as possible while you jot down notes or turn the pages of
your notebook. Do not write down everything that happens.
Just make general notes about the various aspects of the play
you observe.
• What actor’s performance particularly impressed you?
• If it is an ensemble piece, how did each actor contribute to
the group’s success?
• How well is the play directed?
• How appropriate are the scenery, costumes, lighting,
and props?
These are some of the questions you will need to ask yourself
as a critic and write about in your review.
You may also form ideas during the performance or film
about how the production could have been better. Maybe one
of the actors could have performed better. Maybe you can’t
wrap your head around the story itself or find yourself not
believing a character’s motives. Your responsibility as a critic
is not to be cruel but rather to give your honest opinion about
the overall value of a play and the elements that went into
making it a success, a failure, or something in between.
As you describe the weak and strong points of a produc-
tion, remember that you should not give away every aspect of
the plot or the ending. Even though in this case the reader
will be your merit badge counselor, critics should describe and
illuminate various aspects of a play without giving away the
plot. People will not want to see a play if the critic has already
given away every detail.
Don’t forget the importance of sound when you are
watching a performance. Plays that use microphones to
amplify the actors’ voices and require special effects sounds
use a sound board to create the effects. From a desk, an
operator takes cues from the stage manager ranging from special
effects such as wind or rain, to mood music. When an actor turns
on a radio or answers a phone, it is the sound board
operator that really makes the appropriate music or ring come on.


12 THEATER12 THEATER
Theater Etiquette
Live theater is a different experience than going to a movie.
Many people dress up a bit more to go to the theater. Also,
you can’t eat or drink while watching a play like you can a
movie. The exception to this would be a dinner theater, where
an elegant meal is served to patrons at their table during the
performance, which is usually light theater fare such as a
comedy or musical. You can stroll through the lobby during
intermission for a snack or drink between acts. When the play
is about to begin again, the lights will flick off and on several
times to let patrons know it is time to return to their seats.
Word to the Wise.
Arrive at the
theater at least
20 minutes before
curtain time.
Never enter a live
play late—
it is a distraction
to the actors and
audience members
alike to have
someone fumbling
in the dark to
find a seat.
At the theater, you will be handed a playbill. This leaflet details
the names of the characters and the actors who play them,
how many acts or different parts of the play there are, and when
the intermission will take place. Read the playbill before the play
begins, and keep it so you can refer back to it as you write
your review.
If you go to see a live show, try to get an aisle seat
about seven to 10 rows from the stage. Avoid the
front row because the sight lines to the stage are
nearly straight up. Similarly, avoid the balcony or
back rows of the theater if possible because the
show will not seem nearly as immediate and live if
the characters look the size of postage stamps and
you cannot see the action in all of its detail.


THEATER 13
.Critical Thinking Skills
Critics normally sit about seven to 10 rows back from the
stage, on an aisle seat that is slightly to the left or right of
center stage. This will give you an excellent view of the show
and also enough light from the stage to write short notes to
yourself as the play is under way. If you were a critic for a
newspaper, you would have to leave the theater as soon as the
play was over and write your review that very night. Having
an aisle seat means you would be among the first patrons out
of the theater and on your way.
Types of Theater Companies
Many large cities have professional theater companies that pay
their directors, actors, designers, and crew members for their
professional talents. Ticket prices will be higher (check for
student ticket deals), and you can expect the acting and
production values to be of the finest quality. Because these
are trained, well-paid performers working on a set that has
been designed and created with a great deal of financial
underpinning, as a critic, you would be much more critical
of a professional theater company than of an amateur theater
group. Most professional theaters receive much of their fund-
ing from government programs for the arts, wealthy private
patrons, and ticket sales.
You will find community theater organizations all over.
These are true labors of love on the part of local residents and
represent the best way for you to break into theater
should you decide to pursue this art form further. Tickets
usually are affordable.
Community theater is a volunteer’s paradise.
People from all walks of life—teachers, students,
waiters, mechanics—participate in community
theater as a passionate hobby. People who like
to act, direct, design, build and paint sets,
sew costumes, handle lighting, or serve in any
number of roles from ushers to stage or prop
managers come together to put on productions. In this
setting, everything—from costumes to lighting to staging to the
directing and acting—is done by volunteers on a
shoestring budget.
center stage.
Literally, the
space at the
very center of
the acting area.
It is also slang
for being the
focus of the
audience’s
attention.


14 THEATER
Critical Thinking Skills.
In community and student theater, costumes may
be created from thrift store and garage sale finds
or come out of a volunteer’s personal closet. Props
may be fashioned from toys or everyday household
items. Scenery may be simply painted cardboard
cutouts. Lighting may be done as inexpensively
as possible with colored light bulbs and the use of
a simple rheostat to dim and brighten the action
onstage, a far cry from the high-tech computerized
lighting board you would find on a professional
theater production on Broadway in New York City.
Towns with colleges and universities that have theater
departments offer student productions so that their drama
students can get firsthand experience in the theatrical arts. In
both community and college theater, you should expect both
the action on stage and the production values to be of a dif-
ferent quality than what you will find in professional theater.
As a critic, you would hold amateur productions to a different
standard than what you would expect to see from professionals.
Your assessment of the quality of the productions should be
based and judged in part on what resources the company has
to produce the play. Keep these things in mind as you write
your one-page reviews.
How to Review a Play
The plays you will see or read will likely fall into one of three
broad categories: dramas, comedies, and musicals. There are
advantages in reading plays and other advantages in see-
ing them. If you read a play, you are more likely to notice
strengths and weaknesses in the story itself than if you only
see the play performed.
On the other hand, because plays are written to be per-
formed rather than read, you are more likely to see the full
potential of the play if you see it performed. Either way, you
must look at the play through the eyes of a theater critic.
Suppose you are going to meet the requirement by seeing
three plays. Take your notebook to the theater and concentrate
on the play. Let yourself be entertained, but at the same time,
keep the following in mind and jot down notes that pertain to
these elements.


THEATER 15
.Critical Thinking Skills
Do you believe in the story? Is the plot believable? Of
course, in a fantasy play like Peter Pan, you do not really
believe. But if the story is good, you can suspend your disbe-
lief. That is, you will be persuaded to set aside your doubts if
a fantasy is so good that it makes you believe that it could
happen that way—if people could fly, boys never did grow up,
and Neverland really did exist.
The actors should seem like real people and not like, well,
actors. Ask yourself if the words and actions of the actors
portray the way people in that situation would behave. If the
show is a comedy, the actors’ timing, the comedic pace, and
the rhythm with which they deliver their lines and play off one
another can make or break a play’s success.
In dramatic plays, think about whether the actors are hit-
ting their mark in portraying their individual characters. Are
they overacting or upstaging (overshadowing) another key
player in the scene? Do the characters on stage have good
chemistry, or does it seem as though they are delivering their
lines woodenly, without listening to the other characters or
connecting with the audience? A play should stir your emo-
tions—love, hate, anger, joy, sympathy, grief, elation. It should
not leave you feeling blah.


16 THEATER
Critical Thinking Skills.
Lastly, ask yourself how the play could have been better.
Perhaps a different twist to the plot would make it stronger.
Or the feeling would be more dramatic if one of the characters
were different—an old wizard instead of a young one, for
example. Or a weak man rather than a brave one. Maybe a
secondary character overshadowed the main character, who
should be the center of interest at all times.
Ask yourself these questions as you watch and make
notes. As you develop your critical thinking skills, you will get
better at deconstructing what you are watching and breaking
down the play into its smaller elements. Write down brief but
clear opinions about what you are seeing and comment on
each broad aspect of the play as you watch.
If you are reading a play, you can’t comment about
such things as the directing, costumes, stage sets, or lighting.
However, you can still review the story and the dialogue—the
conversations between characters—with a critical eye.
Soon after you have finished reading or seeing a play,
write down your ideas about the plot and how successful the
play was. Were all the loose ends tied up? Does the foreshadowing
Aside from the
acting, are the
costumes right
for the play? The
lighting? Is the
setting just right?
Is it well-executed
by the set design?


THEATER 17
.Critical Thinking Skills
(the “hints” or “clues” about what is to come) become clear?
Don’t wait. Write down your impressions while they are fresh
in your mind.
To complete requirement 1, your review does not need to
be long and elaborate like a newspaper theater critic’s. Each
review can be about a page long. If you see a great many
things to write about, you may want to make your reviews
longer. However, you don’t need to analyze each production as
thoroughly as a professional critic would.
Backstage on Broadway:
The Hour Before Half Hour
Here is what goes on during that crucial time before
the curtain rises on a Broadway production. An hour
and a half before curtain, the stage managers, stage
hands, and lighting and sound crews are onsite, along
with the prop crew and wardrobe personnel. A half-
hour before curtain is the latest the actors can show
up at the theater.
One hour before that last half hour, the sound
crew checks microphones, charges batteries on mic
(microphone) packs, and distributes the mics to the
actors’ dressing rooms. If the show is a musical,
the sound crew also checks the mics used by back-
ground singers at the foot and the back of the stage.
The prop crew sets all the props for the entire
show and places those to be used in the first act on
stage in position. They shift and rotate the offstage
props as needed. The prop manager goes through
the prop list to make sure all props, from spoons,
forks, a knife, or a gun—anything used or touched by
the actors—are inventoried and on hand.
The wardrobe crew has laundered, ironed, and
made repairs on all clothing and now ensures the
actors’ costumes are in their dressing rooms. For
quick changes, they put wardrobe pieces to be hung
at stage right or stage left on deck level (stage level)
in place.


18 THEATER
Critical Thinking Skills.
stage left,
stage right. The
sides of the stage
as seen through
the actors’ eyes
when facing
the audience.
Basically the entire show is set
up so that as things move offstage
into the wings, other props and
costumes move into position, ready
for use in a later scene.
Lighting, although it is designed
and set before the show’s opening
night, is checked cue by cue to make
sure all lights are working properly.
The lighting operator brings up each
light cue by computer, checking to
make sure all lamps are working and
that the lighting gels that give the
lights their color have not burned
out, causing them to become clear.
On Broadway, there are stage
managers for stage left and stage
right who are responsible for every-
thing that happens on deck level.
They have cue sheets and check
to make sure all props are in place.
They supervise all of the backstage
crew’s work.
The head stage manager calls
the show, barking out sound cues,
light cues, and prop cues over a
headset. If you listened in, you
might hear the stage manager
say something like, “Cue 82, pick


THEATER 19
.Critical Thinking Skills
up the light and pinspot actor in
chair. Cue 83, bring up light on
actor sitting opposed to him. Cue 84,
bring on the desk. Cue 85, lights go
to half (sunrise to sunset).” The stage
manager has the entire script and
calls the whole show.
A half hour before the show
and 15 minutes before the show,
the actors and backstage crew
are given notice. “Half-hour call!”
“Fifteen-minute call!” Five minutes
before curtain, the actors and crew
are given their “Places!” call, which
means everyone backstage should
be in proper position. If an actor is
supposed to be sitting in a chair
on stage when the curtain rises,
he should be sitting in that chair five
minutes beforehand. Then the stage
manager checks with the house
manager (in charge of everything
that takes place on the audience
side of the theater) to make sure
there are no problems in the
house or with seating. The next
call is “Curtain up!” just as the
curtain rises.


Playwright William Shakespeare
(1564–1616)


THEATER 21
.Writing a One-Act Play
Writing a One-Act Play
For requirement 2, you become the playwright and get to pen
your own one-act play. You will develop a great deal of respect
for playwriting and the theater process as you go along. Good
playwrights have perfected their skills over a long period of
time and with lots of practice.
A playwright gets a dramatic idea for a plot or imagines
a main character and then makes up a situation for that
character to unravel. As a playwright, your task is to find a
single dramatic idea and then make that idea live on stage
by surrounding it with characters drawn from life.
First, decide on an idea for a plot. For example, say your
plot involves two Scouts on a backpacking trip where every-
thing goes wrong. Perhaps the two Scouts are arguing over
which one forgot to bring the tent poles while their only din-
ner burns on a camp stove. Meanwhile, more bad luck—a
storm is starting to brew. As one Scout is walking away angrily
from the argument, he trips over a tent stake, falls onto some
rocks, and breaks his leg.
The second Scout first thinks the other is faking and
makes fun of him. But when he sees his friend is actually hurt,
he quickly puts his own anger aside, makes a splint, and helps
his fellow Scout out of the woods. As they are walking out,
the two weary Scouts wind up friends again, laughing over the
huge number of things that went awry on their backpacking
trip. They vow to be better prepared next time and will not risk
their friendship again over petty arguments.
If you get an idea that you think would be good for
a play, ask your merit badge counselor or your English or
drama teacher about it. Chances are good that one of them
will be able to tell you whether your idea can be developed
into a drama.


22 THEATER
Writing a One-Act Play.
In the simple drama you are trying to write, the most
important thing is to have some type of conflict. This conflict
might be between the wills of two people (such as in the
example above), or a person struggling against a natural force
such as a flood or tornado, or a character dealing with some
aspect of life such as a strict new dress code at school or an
older sibling going off to war or college.
The point is, there will be some kind of conflict in your
play, and the conflict will be resolved somehow. In the sim-
plest terms, your plot might be, “Boy meets girl, boy loses girl,
boy wins girl back.” It is up to you to decide who and what
you would like to write a short one-act play about. Just make
sure it is a simple plot and that you can envision how you
would stage it.
Playwright August Wilson received a Pulitzer Prize for his play Fences, about a father
who forbids his son to accept an athletic scholarship.
Neil Simon has been
described as one of
America’s most
successful and
prolific playwrights.


THEATER 23
.Writing a One-Act Play
Finding a Character
One good way to find a plot for your play is to think about
people you know. Often you can develop a plot by starting
with a particular person you know well, someone who has an
outstanding character trait.
For example, perhaps you know a Scout who sets a good
example of a person who lives by the Scout Law. You could
place this Scout in a situation where his or her character
is tested. You might make him or her the child of a poor
fisherman who has a chance to get a great deal of money for
college by doing one tiny dishonest act that only he or she will
ever know about.
There you have the seed of a drama. The Scout would be
the main character. The conflict would be the Scout’s struggle
against wrongdoing. The climax of the play would be the point
where the Scout makes his or her decision.
Write your play about things you know, and pattern the
characters in your script after people you know and under-
stand. Do not take a chance on a subject or setting you know
little about. If you do, the story and the characters are likely to
sound false. If you believe in the characters and the plot, your
audience will, too.
Everyday activities and people you know can give you ideas for a plot and characters.


24 THEATER
Writing a One-Act Play.
Creating a Scenario
Before you write your play, make an outline, from the opening
words through the climax or big scene, to your final dialogue.
This is called a scenario.
A scenario is an important step in writing a play. If you do
not plan out your drama, you will find yourself rewriting and
rewriting it. Even though your play will have only one act and
one set, you need a scenario to keep on track from start to fin-
ish. As you write, you may make changes in your scenario, but
at least it will keep you from wandering off into dialogue that
does not advance the plot toward its climax.
As you develop your scenario, you must keep in mind
your setting—what it looks like and where each of your
characters will be at any moment. Prepare a short biography
of each of the most important characters to help bring them
to life.
Using the example again of the two Scouts on the disas-
trous camping trip, it is not enough that you know both of
these youth are Scouts. Describe what they look like. What
are their personalities like? Tell about their background, where
they come from, and their individual quirks and values. Such
facts about your characters may never enter your drama, but if
you have each character fixed in your imagination as a living
person, it will be easier for you to bring your drama to life.
Writing Dialogue
If you have never listened closely to a group of your friends
talking on some subject, try it. You will be surprised at how
disjointed their conversation seems when you pay close atten-
tion to each sentence. The exchange is likely to be full of “wells”
and “uhs” and “you knows.” Yet, somehow, all the sentences
finally come together in a meaning everyone understands.
The challenge in writing dialogue for the stage is cutting
out all the unnecessary phrases—everything that is not vital to
the story or the characterization—and at the same time main-
taining the flavor of natural speech. If you are writing a dia-
logue between two Scouts, they must sound like Scouts—not
like college professors or children. At the same time, you must
compress their speech. If you wrote down exactly what two
Scouts might actually say, you would have so many words that
your audience would fall asleep before you reached the climax
of your play.


THEATER 25
.Writing a One-Act Play
Trim the Excess
A one-act play written by a professional playwright would
probably run about 10,000 words—about as much as a very
long short story. As a beginner, you won’t want to write that
much. Your play should be about 10 to 12 handwritten pages
or eight to 10 typed (double-spaced) pages. This will give you
enough room to develop one dramatic idea and resolve it. You
will not have much room for embellishments or for a deep
exploration of the people in your play. But it will give you a
feel for the art that is at the center of the theater experience.
Just remember to edit your play after you write it.
Trim anything that does not advance the plot of your play
or give your audience some insight into your characters
and their motives.
Study This Sample Play
Let’s take a look at a sample play by expanding on the disas-
trous camping trip example so you can get some concrete ideas
on how to begin writing your scenario and your own play.
First, we need to develop brief biographies for the two
Scouts in the one-act play, which will be called Campout Chaos.
Tank Morgan: Age 14, Star Scout, athletic build, captain of
his junior high football team. Loves sports. Loyal, trustworthy,
gregarious and outgoing, friendly, and a lifelong friend of Garrett
Miles. Fairly disorganized both in school and in his personal
life, he struggles to stay eligible to play football because his
grades are not great. Leans on his best friend, Garrett, a great
deal to keep him organized because he can’t seem to do
it himself.
Here are a few things to remember when writing dialogue.
Make it easy to say. Avoid tongue-twisting words, and keep
sentences short.
Read it aloud. If a Scout is speaking, does his or her part sound like a
Scout, or does it sound like the speech of a senator or an announcer on TV?
Does the dialogue move your story along toward its conclusion? Do not
insert a joke in the dialogue unless it advances your plot or tells the
audience something about one of your characters. You might like the
joke, but it will distract the audience unless it fits into the story.


26 THEATER
Writing a One-Act Play.
Garrett Miles: Age 14, Life Scout, mechanical, a
computer nerd. Likes gadgets, working on cars, video games,
and backpacking, and is actually reading every word of the
A to Z encyclopedias in his spare time. Bookish and bright.
Slender, quiet, good-looking but shy. Meticulous about
planning and highly organized, Garrett always has everything
he owns in working order and seems to have every tool or
item needed on Scout outings. Although he thinks of Tank as
the brother he never had, Garrett is getting a bit tired of Tank
just assuming he will pick up all the pieces that Tank seems to
regularly let fall by the wayside.
Now that you have the main characters in mind, the con-
flict will be between these two, and the climax will be at the
height of the dreadful camping trip during which there is an
emergency and their lifelong friendship is tested.
Let’s create the scenario.
The scene is a rocky ridge where Tank and Garrett are
trying to raise their tent. Tank, however, has forgotten to bring
one of the tent poles so the tent is basically at half-mast,
drooping in the back. Nearby is a camping stove with a one-
pot meal cooking on it. It is late afternoon on a cold autumn
day. There are a few downed tree branches around their hilltop
campsite and rocks below them. Their backpacks are nearby.
One backpack is neatly packed and seems to have everything a
camper could need such as rope, a camp shovel, rolled sleep-
ing bag, mess kit, etc. The other pack is nearly empty and
sloppy-looking. The painted backdrop shows thunderheads
looming in the background.
As the play opens, Garrett is joking with but also frustrated
with Tank, who was responsible for bringing the tent, for not
checking to make sure it had all of its poles and enough tent
stakes. Now they have hiked 10 miles from the trailhead and it
is too late to go back. Tank is shrugging off his lack of organi-
zation and suggests they just forget the tent and sleep outside
in their sleeping bags. Garrett is watching the sky and thinks
they are in for a huge storm.
While Garrett and Tank are trying to fashion a downed
tree branch into a tent pole and messing around with the tent,
the one-pot meal boils over. The tree branch the boys have
been working on breaks in two and the tent sags again.


THEATER 27
.Writing a One-Act Play
The friends start bickering over who forgot what, who
ruined the dinner, and whether or not it is going to storm.
Pretty soon the two are accusing each other of idiotic things
that happened between them long ago on troop campouts.
What began with friendly kidding has escalated to in-your-
face yelling.
Tank marches back to the tent to drag his sleeping bag
out into the open. He has decided to sleep outside and to
heck with the weather and his best friend’s opinions. He tells
Garrett if he was so worried about the tent, he should have
checked Tank’s backpack beforehand. Garrett, usually quiet,
is about to fly off the handle.
Just then, Tank stumbles hard over a tent stake and falls
flat on his back. A huge clap of thunder booms at the same
time and nearly drowns out the sound of Tank’s voice.
Garrett thinks his buddy is just faking it and is sure Tank
will jump up and tackle him teasingly if he shows the least
bit of concern. Plus he wants to point out to Tank that he was
wrong about the storm. But Tank does not get up, does not
reply, and when Garrett goes to check on him, he realizes
from the look on Tank’s face that he is in great pain.
Garrett quickly puts his anger aside and carefully kneels
beside his friend. He quickly assesses the situation and tells
Tank he has broken his leg. Tank’s leg is throbbing in pain; he
tells Garrett there is no way he can walk and there is no way a
skinny little guy like Garrett can carry him out. Garrett doesn’t
want to leave Tank behind in the approaching storm to go for
help. He scrambles around for some rope and his knife, and
grabs the lone tent pole to fashion a splint. As Garrett is splint-
ing Tank’s leg, the reality of the situation has dawned on Tank.
Garrett splints Tank’s leg and gets the big guy on his
feet. The storm sounds nearer, with thunder rumbling in the
background and lightning on the horizon. As they are walking
off the stage together, Tank limping badly with his arm slung
over Garrett’s shoulder, Garrett laboring under the weight of
his larger friend, Tank apologizes for being so careless and
disorganized. Garrett accepts the apology. The end scene
shows the friends walking off together and teasing one another
once again in a friendly way, laughing about the chaotic
campout where everything went wrong.


28 THEATER28 THEATER
CAMPOUT CHAOS
A Drama in One Act by Jesse Morrow
Characters:
TANK MORGAN—athletic, outgoing Scout
GARRETT MILES—small, bookish Scout
Scene: The scene is a campsite. At left, the audience sees GARRETT
standing with his hands on his hips as TANK emerges from a half-
raised tent with one tent pole missing in back. Beyond the sagging
tent is a menacing bunch of thunderclouds on the horizon. At right
is a small camping stove bubbling with something cooking in it. Two
backpacks, one outfitted correctly for a Scout, the other nearly empty
and sloppily put together, lie on the ground. Downed tree limbs are
scattered around.
GARRETT: Tank, remember the conversation we had right before we
hiked 10 miles in here when I asked you if you’d packed both tent
poles and all the tent stakes?
TANK: I must have left the other tent pole in the garage. I’m not
sure what happened to the rest of the tent stakes. It’s no big deal,
Garrett. Let’s just rough it tonight and sleep outside in our bags.
That is the scenario for the play. It is nothing but a
skeleton that will need a good deal of fleshing out, but
it gives an outline to follow in writing the dialogue.
The Script
The opening dialogue for this sample one-act play
presents the basic format your finished script should
follow. This is not the whole play, just enough to
give you the idea.
Notice that the stage directions are underlined and enclosed in
parentheses. As you prepare your own script, you will want to add occa-
sional stage directions and advice for the actors on how a line should
be said. Do not overdo this. The director will be in charge of bringing
your play to life on stage. Leave most of the directing to the director.


THEATER 29
.Writing a One-Act Play
GARRETT: Dude, have you checked the horizon? Look at
those thunderheads!
TANK (crawling out of the tent, smiling): OK, Chicken Little, take
it easy. A little rain isn’t going to kill us. Let’s make one of those
limbs into a tent pole.
GARRETT (look-
ing around at the
downed branches):
Most of these
branches are
rotted through.
There’s no way
they’ll hold up a
wet tent.
TANK (looking
playfully toward
the camping stove,
where the pot is
now boiling over):
Don’t be such a
cynic. It’s not
going to rain. Hey,
what are you fir-
ing up for dinner
there, Chef?
GARRETT (suddenly turning around and remembering the stove
he walked away from to deal with the tent): Freeze-dried beef
stroganoff—oh, man, look at that. It’s totally ruined.
TANK: I could eat a bear and a moose for dessert after that hike.
What else did you bring?
GARRETT (turning off the stove and plucking the hot pot off with
his rolled-up jacket): Me bring? You were supposed to bring the
food and the tent for this trip. I brought everything else, remem-
ber? I just happened to have that packet of freeze-dried stuff in
my backpack.
TANK: That’s it? We don’t have anything else to eat?
GARRETT: That’s right, Tank. Oh, did I forget to mention the tent
at half-mast—and the storm that just happens to be scratching
my back?
TANK (marching off toward the tent): Yeah, and the sky is falling
and no one will listen to you. Lighten up, dude.


30 THEATER
Writing a One-Act Play.
GARRETT: Sure, no problem. Just like the last three campouts we
went on, remember? You completely blow off your end of things
every time. Nothing ever changes.
TANK: You’re the one who’s always prepared for everything,
Garrett. You should have known I wouldn’t have my act together.
GARRETT: What? You want me to check your pack before every
campout? To make sure you packed everything you said you
would? I’m not your mama.
TANK (grabbing his sleeping bag out of the tent and punching it
hard): Look, bud, the storm’s going to pass in a couple of minutes,
and we won’t starve without one dinner. I’m sleeping out under
the open sky tonight. We’re Scouts, remember? We’re supposed to
be tough outdoorsmen. Why don’t you go tie yourself in a bunch of
knots with all that rope you brought. Just get off my back.
(TANK turns away sharply and
tumbles over a tent stake,
falling on his back. TANK cries
out as he falls. At the same time
a clap of thunder rumbles in the
background, nearly muffling his
cry. The sky grows darker as
GARRETT dries off the camp pot
and repacks it in his backpack.)
TANK: Ooof! Aaaaaaaaahhhhh!
GARRETT (looking toward where
TANK has landed): Tank? Come
on, you faker. Sure, the captain
of the football team fell over a
tent stake and landed flat
on his back. Get up and help
me find a branch to hold up
this tent.
TANK (grabbing his lower leg,
wincing in pain): Oooohhhh…
GARRETT (alarmed, peering
toward Tank in the growing
darkness): TANK? Are you
all right?
* * *


THEATER 31
.Writing a One-Act Play
Writing Your Own Play
When you have your characters and setting
in mind and have completed your scenario,
start writing your own play. As you write,
keep a few simple things in mind—not as
rules but as guides.
Early in the play, let the audience
know who the characters are and what
the problem is. In Campout Chaos, both
characters are Scouts. The audience can
tell this because Garrett refers to past Scout
campouts they have been on and Tank
states that they are Scouts and “supposed
to be tough outdoorsmen.” It is also clear,
at least to a Scout audience, that Garrett
knows his Scouting. He makes it clear that
he has brought everything he was supposed to bring and has
overcompensated for his friend’s disorganization on more than
one campout in the past. The audience also knows the root of
the conflict between the two Scouts. One is normally prepared
for anything; the other is careless and too carefree.
Plant some hints early in the play that will make your big
scene or climax more effective. Try to increase the suspense as
you build up to the climax. Then, put the climax near the end
of the play.
An audience wants to know how a drama pans out. Once
you have shown that, it will be hard to hold their interest
much longer. In Campout Chaos, the climax comes when Tank
breaks his leg and Garrett, the good Scout, utilizes the things
he brought to render aid despite his anger at his friend. Tank,
realizing he has been wrong about everything and that his
disorganization led to a bummer of a camping trip and nearly
the loss of a lifelong friendship, apologizes. He will probably
be out of football for the rest of the season but he has learned
a valuable lesson. The fact that these characters have faced dif-
ficulty and worked out their differences is emphasized by the
fact that they can laugh and find humor in the situation after
the fact. Then the curtain comes down.





THEATER 33
.Acting a Part
Acting a Part
When you were younger, you probably played make-believe all
the time. You might have been a doctor, firefighter, or teacher, or
any number of imaginative people you made up in your head.
If you still have an active imagination and can envision your-
self playing many different roles, this could be a sign that you
will make a good actor.
Maybe there is a drama club or class at your school that
puts on plays during the school year. If so, join it and try to win
a part. Perhaps your town supports a community or children’s
theater or summer stock theater. Community theaters often
cast lots of children and young adults in seasonal plays such
as Scrooge or Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat,
particularly around major holidays. These venues would give
you an excellent opportunity to get acting experience and learn
about every facet of the theater.
If you feel comfortable
trying requirement 3(a),
do it. In no other way can
you get the same thrill of
working in the theater
than by acting a role on
stage in a play. You can
learn a lot about the
theater process by filling
other positions such as
directing or designing,
but if you are acting, then
you are at the heart and
soul of theater.


34 THEATER
Acting a Part.
If these opportunities are not available where you live,
how about your troop? Are there three or four other Scouts
who would like to try their hand in the theater? If so, perhaps
you could work with your counselor to plan a play for your
next troop outing. It may not be Broadway quality, but it can
be a lot of fun. At the same time, you will learn much more
about the theater by taking part in an actual production than
you would by reading all the books on drama in the library.
Qualities of an Actor
What qualities do you need as an actor? To begin, you need
to be able to project your voice so that you can be heard
distinctly in the back of an auditorium. You also need a
good memory because you must be able to memorize hun-
dreds of lines and bits of stage directions. A good memory is
mainly a case of being able to focus or concentrate, and such
concentration can be learned with practice.
You also need self-assurance—the confidence that you
are capable of playing your part and the conviction that you
can convince an audience to believe in your character. Self-
assurance also comes with practice in front of people.
You need a good imagination. Without imagination, your
character will not come alive. Ninety-nine percent of acting
is imagination.


THEATER 35
.Acting a Part
With these qualities—most of which can be acquired—
you can be a good actor. The greatest actors have an additional
quality that is difficult to describe. It is a force of personality
that energizes the audience as if a spark of electricity were
passing back and forth between actor and spectator. Not every-
one has that magic, but by working hard and studying, you,
too, can become a fine actor.
Auditioning for a Role
When you audition or read for a part, do
not waste valuable energy worrying about
whether the director will like you. Get up
there and show your stuff. If your audition
starts out shaky, do not be afraid to stop
and ask to begin again.
Occasionally, after a good reading, the
director will ask you to read again and offer
you an acting adjustment. Many times, that
is done to see if you can take direction; it
might not have anything to do with the
scene or your own interpretation of the
part. Other times, the director may be looking
for different qualities in your persona
or personality.
Portraying a Character
Once you have the part, the first and most important approach
for the actor is to read the play and find out what the play-
wright wants to say to the world. Who, what, where, and when
are some of the questions you should ask yourself when you
first get a part.
Who am I? What kind of person is this character I am to play?
As your character, you must know how old you are. What
grade are you in, or have you already finished school? As your
character, you must decide what your favorite color is, what
your favorite food is, what food you detest, what your favorite
TV shows are, the type of music you like or dislike, and so on.
In short, you must know the same things about your character
as you know about yourself.


36 THEATER
Acting a Part.
What time is it? When does the action take place? What kind
of day is it? Example: “It’s 7 a.m. on Saturday and I am (as my
character) getting ready for a campout. It’s cloudy with a light
rain falling.”
Where am I? Where does the action take place? Example: “I
am in my bedroom and it’s a mess, so I have to spend time
digging in the closet for my equipment. I can hear the sound
of music coming from the stereo in my brother’s room, which
is down the hall.”
What surrounds me? What objects are around me? Example:
“My backpack is on the floor along with my camping gear,
rain gear, clothes, swimsuit, and toothbrush.”
What are the given circumstances? What is the situation?
What events are taking place? Example: “My family has just
moved here so this is a new troop for me. John, from three
doors down, and his dad will pick me up in 20 minutes, and
I’m not ready.”
What do I want? What are my objectives? Example:
“I want the other Scouts to like me. I want to make friends.
I want to do a good job so others will respect me.”
What is in my way? What obstacles confront me? Example:
“I’m nervous and a little scared because I don’t know anyone.
I can’t remember everything I need. I can’t find all my gear.”
What must I do to get what I want? What
actions do I take? Example: “I make a checklist
of everything I will need and check it off as I
find things. I mentally make a list of funny sto-
ries so I will have something to tell around the
campfire. I will volunteer to help teach others a
skill I already know such as how to pitch a tent
or pack a backpack.”
Another important part of portraying a charac-
ter is to know yourself. Know who you are and
who your character is. Find your own sense of
identity, enlarge upon it, and discover how that
knowledge can be put to use in the characters
you will portray onstage. Many directors will
tell you that when you audition, it isn’t just
the reading that gets the actor the role. It is the
actor’s qualities, plus the reading, that does.


.Acting a Part
Doing mime
exercises
can help your
coordination,
improve your
physique, and
help you better
understand
how people
communicate
nonverbally
through body
language in
everyday life.
Your own identity and self-knowledge are the main
sources for any character you play. Renowned acting instructor
Lee Strasberg said, “If we cannot see the possibility of great-
ness, how can we dream it?” Sanford Meisner, a noted New
York acting teacher, said that acting is living truthfully under
imaginary circumstances.
Mime
When you run around a track, lift weights, step into a pitch
and swing toward the fences, or let loose on the dance floor,
you are using your body as your instrument. The same is true
in mime, a form of theater that requires you to communicate
to your audience without words, using your body to express
your ideas.
Before you start requirement 4, do some basic warm-up
exercises. Run around a room, do leg stretches, move your
arms in wide circles, do 10 jumping jacks. Then lie on your
back for a couple of minutes and relax quietly.
Try an introductory mime exercise: Run around the room,
shaking out your legs and arms until you are really loose.
Make a lot of noise, any sound you feel like making. Then
suddenly freeze like a stone. Do not move a muscle. Try not
to let anyone see that you are breathing.
When you freeze, you are
disciplining your body to
hold perfectly still. You are
also learning how to use
your body’s shape and lines
to explore the rhythmic world
of mime.
THEATER 37


38 THEATER
Acting a Part.
Now run and freeze again in any position you land in.
Even though you are perfectly still on the outside, do not be a
dead statue made of stone on the inside. Imagine that on the
inside, you are full of energy, prepared at any second to spring
into action. As a mime, this energy that emits from inside you
makes you exciting to watch. It turns a simple game—playing
statue—into a performance.
Try making yourself into a statue that shows a specific
feeling, like anger, happiness, pain, or fear. If the group has
trouble figuring out the emotion you are trying to express,
spend time figuring out ways to improve your statue so your
meaning is clear.
Next try some slow-motion exercises. You have seen slow-
motion replays on television in football, baseball, and Olympic
sports such as skiing and gymnastics. When you see the ath-
letes in slow motion, you can pick up the smallest details of
their performance and the action that took place.
In mime, you can control your body and use the rhythm
of slow motion—where there are no stops in the action, no
sudden or quick movements. The rhythm never changes; it
stays slow and constant from beginning to end.
Use your whole body when you are doing mime in slow
motion. When you run in slow motion, use your whole body
and shift your weight gradually from one foot to the other to
keep the effect going. Exaggerate all of your movements. Try
skating, shoveling dirt, hammering nails, or brushing your
teeth in slow motion. Watch yourself in a mirror until your
slow-motion rhythm is perfect.
Mimes also use staccato rhythm in performance. These are
sharp, short, sudden movements separated from the others by
a slight freeze in action. If you have ever seen anyone dance
under a flashing strobe or disco ball, you have noticed that
they look like mechanical people; their movements seem like
they are separate frames on movie film.
With a group, take turns freezing in the middle of
an imagined activity, like swinging a bat, catching a
football, or climbing a ladder. Do not use any props.
Try to freeze in a position that reveals what you are
doing. The group can then guess what the statue was
in the midst of doing.


.Acting a Part
For requirement 4, practice one of the activities suggested
in slow motion. Then try it in staccato motion. Remember to
use your entire body and exaggerate each movement. Create
situations that are funny, graceful, or slightly offbeat by exag-
gerating your facial expressions and isolating and defining your
body’s reactions to the situation.
For instance, for requirement 4(e), pretend that you really
do not like the vegetable with your dinner, that it is as awful as
eating a jar of baby food would be. Each bite would bring you
closer to scooping the offending vegetable into your napkin
and hiding it under the table—or feeding it to an
imaginary dog.
Charlie Chaplin, a famous silent-screen star, was a
master at staccato rhythms. The short, snappy way
he walked with his feet splayed outward like a duck,
a cane perpetually swinging at his side, and the
way he jauntily bobbed his head from side to side
became his trademarks.


40 THEATER
Acting a Part.
One of the most well-known mime routines is “the robot.”
Robots do not walk or move like people do. Use shuffling,
small steps and keep your feet close together as you slide
across the floor. Turn on a dime sharply.
If you try robotic or mechanical man movements, you
need to work in “neutral”: In other words, you do not show
any emotion or facial expressions. Mimes often wear whiteface
makeup to mask their facial expressions and neutralize their
appearance and personality, which in turn makes their actions
speak louder.
All work in mime starts with what is called the neutral
zero position. In this position, you do not show emotion,
thought, or action. Start all your skits from this position.
First, stand up straight with your heels together and your
feet open about 4 inches. Tuck in your stomach and buttocks,
thrust your chest out, and keep your shoulders back and your
arms straight down with hands loosely touching your thighs.
With your chin in, try to create a straight line from the back
of your head down to your ankles. Now relax your face.
Open your mouth slightly so you do not look uptight or
angry. Practice this stance and remember to let your inner
spark shine through.
The robot


THEATER 41
.Acting a Part
Pantomime
The word “mime” comes from the Greek word
mimos, meaning “representation.” Mime is the
art of acting out a message or a saying that is
abstract. For instance, a mime might act out
the idea that he or she drinks all the cola from a
soft-drink bottle, then climbs into the bottle
and becomes trapped.
Pantomime is similar to mime in that
it is also a silent art, but it retells a story,
legend, or tale. Mime and pantomime
both involve action instead of words.
An everyday example is when umpires
crouch over a close play and spread their
arms wide with their palms down, telling
the crowd in the stands that the runner
is safe. In your classroom, when you raise
your hand in answer to a question, you
are using pantomime to tell the teacher you
know the answer.
Pantomime has had a long, illustrious
place in theater. Even today, many comedians
use pantomime as an important ingredient in
their performances.


42 THEATER
Acting a Part.
Practice
For requirement 4, you must make up gestures and movements
to suit the character you are playing. Practice your short skits
many times before a full-length mirror and try them out on
your family or friends before you perform for your counselor.
Think through each situation and break it down into the pre-
cise movements and expressions you will use to convey exactly
what you want your audience to see.
One basic practice technique in
mime is “the wall.” Think of yourself
in this exercise as being confined in a
box, a room, a bottle, etc. Be sure you
know where your wall is. Begin with a
fisted hand, then open it out and press
on the invisible wall. Now do the other
hand. Be sure to watch your hands. With
a flick of the wrist, remove one hand from
the wall, loosely fist it again, and put it
back on the wall. Repeat the exercise.
Another practice technique is “the
rope.” Climb up the rope or pull on a rope.
Imagine the rope is about 2 or 3 inches in
diameter. Hold it in both hands with one hand farther out than
the other. Let go with the near hand, and make a flat hand.
Keep the rope hand in the same place and lean with your
torso. Replace your hand and pull the rope with your torso,
keeping the same distance between hands. Repeat.
Before you perform, observe people for a while. Note their
facial, hand, and body expressions. As you practice your short
scenes, remember body tension,
facial expression, exaggeration,
and the surroundings you have
established. Do not walk into
a “wall” or “table” or “bus”
that you have already
established is there.
The wall
The rope


THEATER 43
.Acting a Part
Ideas for Skits
Besides the six pantomime situations described in requirement
4, you can work up other ideas for skits. Skits should have
a definite beginning, middle, and end—and a conflict and
resolution. A good length for a skit is about 60 to 90 seconds.
Here are some ideas for pantomime skits:
• You are on a hike and enjoying the beauty of nature. You
find a stick and throw it; it hits a beehive.
• (For two people) Bored, one person has an idea. You play
tug-of-war; one person wins, the other sulks; then you
make up.
• You are the first robot allowed to compete against humans
in a sporting event.
• You are a traffic cop involved in dramatically directing traffic
on a busy city street. A truck skids into the intersection and
refuses to stop when you blow your whistle.
• (For a group) Make up a slow-motion replay of a sport like
you would see on TV. Decide beforehand what will happen
during the replay, what the outcome will be, and who will
play each part.





THEATER 45
.Directing a Play
Directing a Play
An author has written a play, a producer has decided to stage
it, and now its fate is in the hands of a director. The director
will be in complete charge of the production. What the audi-
ence finally sees will be what the director has achieved.
Probably most of the plays you will take part in will be
produced and directed by an adult—perhaps a teacher at your
school or the director of a community theater. So if you are
going to direct a play for requirement 3(b), you may have to
organize your own players from among your friends and
fellow Scouts. Perhaps you could stage the final performance
at a troop meeting.
You may want to present the one-act play that you wrote for
requirement 2. If that does not seem suitable, ask your counselor for
assistance. Almost certainly you will find a play that interests you and
falls within your ability to direct.


46 THEATER
Directing a Play.
Visualization
Your first step as a director is to study the play you have cho-
sen. For a full understanding of what the author is driving at,
what sort of people the characters are, and the setting for the
play, a director must read and reread the play. Before casting
or planning any other details of the production, the director
must “see” the play completely in his or her mind.
The author will not have filled in every detail about
each character. The author probably did not reveal
the physical appearance of all the characters and
may have left gaps in revealing their personalities.
Fill these in with your imagination, based on your
knowledge of the script.
If you study a script carefully, you may find yourself imag-
ining one character as noble but vain, tall, handsome, and a
little neater in his dress than the average guy. You might see
another character as a blunderer, slight in build, nervous, and
careless in his clothes and grooming. Develop these images in
your mind as you think about a particular play.


THEATER 47
.Directing a Play
Casting
All of this study will be a big
help to you when you begin
casting the play. If your concep-
tion of the play’s hero is a tall,
dark-haired, handsome man, do
not give the part to your best
friend who is short, stocky, and
fair-complexioned—especially
if he is a poor actor. Try to fit
the actor to the play character,
rather than making the character
fit the actor. This may take some
tact and diplomacy, particularly
if your best friend thinks of him-
self as a talented actor. But you
must choose the right person for
each part, or you will find your
production drooping even before
the dress rehearsal.
How should you go about making your choices? There are
several methods. Of course, if you have seen all the candidates
perform before, you already know how well they can act. But
suppose you do not know them that well. You might ask each
one to read a short scene from the play. This will give you an
idea of how well they express themselves and their ability to
project an emotion or thought.
As the director, you have some other things to worry
about while you are in the early stages of prepara-
tion—maybe even before you have chosen the cast:
the stage itself, the setting, the costumes, the props,
and the lighting. You will probably have to handle
these duties yourself, unless you are lucky enough
to be directing a fairly big production in your school
or community.


48 THEATER
Directing a Play.
Another good way to find out who can act best is by
assessing each actor’s feel for the story. Let each candidate
read through the play. Then ask each one to perform a scene—
not word for word, of course—by improvising and making up
lines. These improvisations will help you choose the best actor
for each part.
Once you have chosen the cast, stick to your choices
unless it is absolutely necessary to change. Most people will
not be offended if they are not picked for a role, but almost
anyone would be hurt if they were removed from their part
without a very good reason.
Rehearsing the Play
Cast members should be prepared by practicing their lines
even before the first rehearsal. At the first rehearsal, have the
actors read through their parts and begin to learn their lines.
During the second rehearsal, talk to them about the move-
ments you want them to make. You and each of the actors
should have a script to work from, and even before the first
rehearsal, you should have made some notes on your script.
Your notes should include what you want each actor to
be doing and where they should be on the stage during each
scene. You might want to make changes later, but you should
have some ideas before rehearsals start.
When you have decided these things, your actors can
make notes in their scripts about these movements. This
process of planning the stage business is called blocking.
By your third or fourth rehearsal, the cast members should
know their roles well enough to run through the play with-
out scripts and without much prompting. Your task now is to
refine the performance until each actor seems to be getting the
most out of their part and until the play moves briskly along
toward its climax.
The final preparation is called the dress rehearsal. Some
productions—especially those that have elaborate costumes—
may have more than one dress rehearsal. At a dress rehearsal,
the actors, wearing their costumes, go through the entire play
without interruption. In addition, all scenery and lighting
effects are used.


THEATER 49
.Directing a Play
Directors who
are well-prepared
have nothing
to do when the
curtain rises—
except to watch
the performance,
of course.
Staging the Play
At the time of the performance, the director’s task is over.
However, in a small production like the one you are likely
to be directing, you may also serve as the lighting operator,
the prop person, a stagehand, and the prompter. If so, you
will be among the busiest people in the theater.
At dress rehearsals, the actors are in costume and go through
the entire play without stopping.
The backstage technical crew, or stage crew, is
responsible for running the show. In small theater
companies, often the same people who build the set
and handle the load-in (placing the set on the stage
where the play is to be performed, and anchoring it
using such methods as bolting frames to the floor)
are the ones who change the scenery and handle the
curtain during performances.





THEATER 51
.Designing a Set
Designing a Set
Commitment is important to the design process because if you
are not committed to doing your best work, your design will
be inadequate. It is the designer’s responsibility to read through
the script and evaluate all the entrances and exits to create a
thumbnail sketch. An entrance can be through a door, a window,
or a curtain. It could be simply an actor walking on stage. An
exit can also be through a door or window, and so on.
You must determine the setting of the play. This will help
you design a set that reflects the time and period in which
the play is set. Examples might include Victorian, medieval,
or perhaps science fiction or futuristic fantasy.
As the designer, you will need to decide if you want
an abstract set or a detailed, realistic, extravagant set. An
abstract set is not realistic. For example, a ladder might
represent a mountain or a tree. A fruit crate could be a rock,
a chair, or a bush.
The style of architecture is also an important issue for set
design. If the play is set in London, you would not want the
architecture to be based on the high-rise buildings of New
York City. If the characters in the play are from the poorest
neighborhood in a large city, you would not want a design
that looks like a middle-class suburb. Sometimes it is a temp-
tation for a designer to create a beautiful picture on the stage
without much regard for whether it fits the play. You must
resist this temptation.
Another thing to take into account is the season and
whether any holidays occur in the script. Keep in mind that
each act might need a different type or style of set. You must
The first step in
set design is to
read the script.
Beware of overloading the set. The audience comes
to the theater prepared to use its imagination, so you
do not have to show every tree or bush in the forest.


52 THEATER
Designing a Set.
also consider the mood of the play. This will help you deter-
mine the appropriate colors and textures to use.
A set design should provide an atmosphere in keeping with
the play and strengthen the illusion of reality. Nevertheless, it
should not be so striking or fascinating that the audience gets
lost in it and stops listening to the play.
Planning a Set
If you decide to fulfill requirement 3(c) by making a model of
the set for the play you wrote, you will not have to study the
script as closely. However, you will have to think over your
design carefully to make sure your set will enhance the play.
Your first consideration in planning the set is the stage
where it will be presented. Is it very wide and shallow? Narrow
and deep? Is it a proscenium (a stage framed by an arch), or an
arena or central stage in which the audience surrounds the
stage? Is the play to be given outdoors at Scout camp? Clearly,
the director and set designer cannot begin to plan settings until
they have considered the limits of their stage.
As Shakespeare
put it: “The play’s
the thing.” The
settings are only
one part of the
production. The
set designer must
bear in mind that
settings are to be
used by actors
whose responsi-
bility it is to bring
the play to life.
The designer can
help them do that
by creating effec-
tive sets, but the
designer alone
cannot bring the
play to life.
portal. A header (or border) and tabs (legs) that can
be moved to adjust the size and shape of the prosce-
nium opening to fit various performance needs. It is
usually located just up stage of the front curtain and
may have provision for mounting lights.
proscenium arch. The framing arch through which,
in many theaters, the audience sees the play. Many
school auditorium stages have a proscenium arch.
central or arena staging. A theater without a prosce-
nium and usually without curtains. The spectators’
seats rise gradually or in tiers, surrounding or nearly
surrounding the stage. The stage itself may be a the-
ater floor or a platform or platforms. It may also be
called theater-in-the-round. Arena staging is especially
good for a play with a small cast in which the action
is confined to a small area. It is not so good for the
bigger, spectacle-type play in which there is a lot of
movement on stage.


THEATER 53
.Designing a Set
At this point you should know the different elements for
the initial design. Perhaps trees are necessary, or a kitchen
table, a park, a couch, or maybe even a mountain. Perhaps the
design needs a focal point around which the action of the play
will revolve. In a famous mystery play called Dial M for Murder,
the audience learns the question of whodunit through a door.
In that case, the door would figure prominently in the design.
Using a ruler or an architect’s scale and these ideas, start
an in-depth draft of your design. State which type of materials
you think your set should be made of, such as plywood, fabric,
plastic, metal, or maybe plastic foam. Label the objects in your
design. For example, if you have a door in your design, you
might mark it “a 6-foot plywood door with 2-inch pine molding.”
Think of the sight lines from the audience’s perspec-
tive—what the audience will be able to see on the stage. A set
designer has to produce a ground or floor plan, a front eleva-
tion, and the sight-line illustrations, which are drawn to scale
and in detail.
A sight-line drawing uses a floor plan like the one you
illustrated and a floor plan of the auditorium. You find the far-
thest extents to which the audience can see, then construct or
plan the design around those limits. This not only helps in the
set construction but is also a great help to the technical crew.
Sight-line drawing


54 THEATER
Designing a Set.
A front elevation design is done when you take the front
view of a set and flatten it into a single plane. This will help
people to see the height of the elements that your imagination
has created. The ground plan is an aerial view of the stage or
a floor plan of the set indicating the width of objects used. It
must be very precise.
Another important
part of the stage
is the fly loft, or
flies. It is the
area above the
stage, hidden
from the audience
by a border or
drapery, to which
scenery can be
lifted clear of the
stage. Many
modern theaters
do not have a
space above
the stage and
so are restricted
to plays with a
single set, minimal
settings, or other
conventional
staging.
Ground plan
Front elevation


THEATER 55
.Designing a Set
Building a Model
The final step in designing a set is to create a model.
The two types of models are the functional model and the
production model.
A functional model is basically a thumbnail sketch
put into three dimensions so that a set designer can see
if his or her ideas work. A production model is complete
in every detail. All of the hand (transportable) props are
included in a production model, which is the final product
of a designer’s imagination.
A 3-foot-wide model is a good working size, but you can
build your model set any size you want. For backdrops, use
gray cloth. Paint scenery on the cloth if the play calls for it, or
simply hang the cloth as a neutral background. For props, con-
sider small toys and doll furniture for your model but remem-
ber to consider each character’s personality. Are the characters
collectors of odds and ends, or do they dislike clutter? These
considerations determine the choice of props.
Some set designers use what is called a cyclorama, a
large composite picture placed or projected on an interior
wall of a stage or a cylindrical room. This gives the scene a
natural perspective.
Once you have considered the ground plan, front eleva-
tion, sight-line drawing, and model, you will have everything
you need to begin an accurate construction of your set. A lot of
research, study, and hard work are necessary to make a truly
accurate set design, but the end result will be worth
your effort.
Hand props are
things carried on
stage or handled
on stage by the
actors, such as
eyeglasses,
letters, or a toy
six-shooter.
cyclorama. 1. A large composite picture placed or
projected on the interior walls of a cylindrical room
so as to appear in natural perspective to a spectator
standing in the center of the room. 2. A large curtain
or wall, usually concave, hung or placed at the rear
of a stage.


56 THEATER
Designing a Set.
For your first
attempt at stage
design for a
single-set play,
you can build a
shoe box model.
A “shoe box
theater” is a
suitable and
inexpensive way
to achieve a good
visual of a set.
The backdrop
can be made
from a stiff piece
of coathanger
wire and a piece
of paper. Use
watercolors,
crayons, or felt-tip
markers to draw
the scenery.
Cut the shoe box
cover along the
lines indicated
in the sketch to
make a valance or
simulated curtain.


THEATER 57
.Designing a Set
Cut the bottom
and one side of
the shoe box as
shown. The rear
opening will
admit a light
(a flashlight
will do). The top
opening will
allow you to put
in a backdrop.
Note the
placement of the
wires on the top
of the shoe box.
There should be
room for two or
three different
backdrops.
Make small
props such as
trees and tents
from the pieces
of cardboard left
over from the
shoe box cover.





THEATER 59
.Building Scenery
Building Scenery
The theater has a place for the artist as actor, director,
or designer. There are many places for craftspeople,
too—carpenters, electricians, painters, and props people.
Requirement 3(f) asks you to try your hand at building and
painting scenery for a theatrical production. To fulfill this
requirement, you will need to join a school drama group or
community or children’s theater in which you will have a
chance to work on and actually build scenery.
Building Flats
There are many ways to achieve the effects on stage called
for by the set designer. Sometimes, for example, curtains of a
neutral gray color provide much of the background for a play,
with a few folding screens or flat shapes suggesting windows,
doors, walls, or other scenery.


60 THEATER
Building Scenery.
For extra strength,
a flat can be
assembled using
mortise and
tenon joints.
Most flats are
assembled using
butt joints.
When building scenery for a play, you probably will be
working mainly with flats. Flats are simply large frames with
canvas or another material stretched over them. They are the
basic unit of stage scenery. They are made of wood or steel
tubing and are normally covered with muslin, plywood, or
other fabrics and materials. The flats are painted as walls or
windows or whatever the play requires. Flats are lightweight
for quick and easy removal and can be used for different plays
simply by painting them a different color.
A wooden flat is 14 feet tall by 4 feet wide, with the rails,
stiles, and toggle bars made from 1-by-3-inch straight white
pine. Flats can be assembled using mortise and tenon or
halved joints for extra strength, but most shops use butt joints.
A stage brace or rod, hooked to the back of a flat at
one end and weighted or screwed down to the floor
at the other end, is sometimes used to support a
standing flat.
The flat on the left is plain and basic; the flat on the right is designed to include a
window. Joints can be reinforced in several ways, as shown by the middle illustration.


THEATER 61
.Building Scenery
For a simpler
production, use
inexpensive
folding screens
or simple frames
with cloth or
canvas coverings.
Putting on the Canvas
For elaborate flats, use heavyweight muslin (128- or 140-thread
count). Cut the muslin slightly larger than the height and
width of the flat. Stretch the muslin over the frame, but avoid
stretching it too tightly—allow room for fabric shrinkage
when painting.
Step 1—Using a staple gun or a tack hammer and tacks, attach
the muslin along the inside edge of one of the stiles. Place the
staples or tacks about a foot apart.
When stretching muslin over a frame, avoid stretching it tight;
you need to allow room for fabric shrinkage when you paint
the muslin.


62 THEATER
Building Scenery.
Step 2—Move to the center of the other stile and pull the
muslin until it barely sags across the face of the flat. Staple or
tack it on the inside edge face of that stile. Be sure that you do
not stretch the muslin too tight.
Step 3—Work your way toward the end of the flat, alternately
pulling and stapling or tacking the material. Do this in both
directions from the tack or staple that you placed in the center
of the stile.
Step 4—In a similar fashion, pull and tack the fabric to the
inside edge of the face of both rails. If there are any wrinkles
or puckers in the fabric, pull the staples or tacks out and
restretch the fabric until it lies smooth.
Step 5—Finish covering the flat; glue the muslin to the frame.
Regardless of the flat’s shape, you should glue the covering
only to the face of the rails and
stiles. To glue the cloth to the
flat, turn the flat of muslin back
around the edge of the flat; apply
a light coat of glue to the face of
the stiles and rails. Use a thorough
but light coating because if it
soaks through the muslin, the glue
may discolor or darken the paint
job. Fold the muslin back onto the
wood and carefully smooth out
any wrinkles with your hand or a
small block of wood.


THEATER 63
.Building Scenery
If the covering
fabric is not glued
to any internal
pieces (toggle
bars, corner
braces), it will
be able to shrink
evenly when the
flat has been
painted. This
uniform shrinkage
will result in fewer
wrinkles on the
face of the
finished flat.
Step 6—After the glue has dried, trim the excess fabric from
the flat. The easiest way to do this is to pull the fabric tight
and then run a matte knife down the edge of the flat.
When this process is completed, you have a basic,
multipurpose flat. There are many special types of flats for
doors and windows that open, as well as such things as stairs
and ramps, that you may need to make. For more building tips,
read about stage scenery in the books listed at the back of
this pamphlet.
Painting Scenery
Painting stage scenery is both an art and a craft. It is a good
idea to have someone who is experienced in scene painting
show you the ropes. One thing to remember as you begin
painting is that the color will be lighter when the paint is dry
than when it is wet. For that reason, it is wise before you
begin painting to test a little of the paint on a piece of paper
or canvas to see how it will actually look when it is dry.
A scene painter needs, at least, shades of yellow, brown,
green, blue, red, black, and white. Ordinary housepainter
brushes of all sizes are necessary on many projects, but 4-inch
brushes are most useful.
The first step in painting a new flat is to prime it, just as
you would if you were painting new wood. However, the main
purpose of using primer is to tighten the canvas. When the
primer has dried, you can begin the real decorating.


64 THEATER
Building Scenery.
Give the project careful thought first. If several flats are
to be joined to create a scene (or a wall), be sure that the paint
is put on with that end result in mind. Otherwise, painted
moldings and wallpaper figures will not match up. Assemble
the flats and mark each one in the order it will be used so you
can be sure that the moldings of wallpaper pattern will come
together properly when the flats are joined.
The actual decorating depends on what your set design
requires. If you must mix paints to get an exact shade of color,
make sure you keep a sample of that exact color on a piece
of paper or in a small can. This way you will not find the set
with two different colored pieces that are supposed to be
the same.
Keep your scene painting bold and
simple. If you are not careful, small
wallpaper figures will look blurred
when viewed from a distance. Make
everything straightforward and
uncomplicated. In scene painting,
you are not striving for realism but
for an illusion.


Lights hung from pipes illuminate this thrust stage. Stage West Productions;
photo by Lee Angle Photography Inc.





THEATER 67
.Lighting the Stage
Lighting the Stage
Lighting is as important to the production as the actors and
the script. Proper lighting techniques are also crucial to follow
since you are working with a powerful and dangerous force—
electricity. Directors and lighting operators are limited, however,
in what they can do by their electrical equipment.
Stage lighting has six functions that must be applied and fol-
lowed in every lighting project:
Visibility—being able to see what is happening on stage
Mood—the emotions stimulated by the light
Composition—the picture created by the light
Focus—the ability of the light to direct one’s attention to a
certain part of the stage
Credibility—the necessity of any light to be relevant to the
dramatic situation
Unity—the ability of light to tie all other aspects of the
show together
Lighting operators achieve these functions by manipulating the
qualities of light. The qualities of light are
Intensity—the quantity of light and shadow
Direction—the angle at which the light hits the stage
Movement—any change in light that suggests motion
Color—used either in a realistic or highly artificial way, affects
moods and attitudes and even perceptions of temperature
Texture—a sense of planned variation in the pattern of lighting
There are two distinct but interrelated areas of stage lighting:
the equipment that controls and distributes the electricity that
creates the light, and the lighting effects that are created—that
is, the design.


68 THEATER
Lighting the Stage.
A “cool” stage
(lit with blues,
greens, and
violets) will
help establish
calm feelings.
A “warm” stage
(lit with reds,
ambers, and
yellows) can
intensify moments
of excitement
or anger.
Stage Lighting Design
While a technical knowledge of lighting equipment is impor-
tant, a lighting designer must first be aware of the needs of the
play to be lit. The lighting designer must determine how the
functions and qualities of stage lighting can best be manipulated
for the production at hand.
The beginning designer should develop a sense of nature’s
own lighting effects in order to make informed yet creative
decisions. Spend time examining how moonlight creates shad-
ows and brilliant dappled light. Observe a sunset and try to
count the number of colors present and how they change and
deepen as night grows closer. Look at the light of a campfire
as it reflects off a lake onto the trees. Think about what mood
that creates.
With each lighting design it becomes the designer’s
responsibility to decide which colors, angles, and intensities
of light best achieve the appropriate look for each moment of
the play. Whether comic or dramatic, most plays take their
audience on some sort of emotional journey. The angle of light
can make a moment eerie (lit from the side) or produce strik-
ing silhouettes (lit from behind).
Lighting plot


THEATER 69
.Lighting the Stage
A designer must begin with a thorough knowledge of the
play in production. Take notes in the script about the effects
needed for each scene and the moods and feelings you think
that creative lighting can help convey. Often a designer will
sketch moments of the play requiring special attention.
From these sketches and notes, elements of design begin
to take shape and the designer will start to draft the layout, or
plot, for the design. During the drafting process, more complex
technical decisions are made as to the exact type and location of
each lighting instrument, electrical circuitry, color, and focus.
Lighting design is best learned through observation and
experimentation. If you can’t work with real stage lights, make
your own instruments using coffee cans and porcelain lamp
mountings. Change the color of the beam with colored plastic
wrap or pieces of fabric. Professional lighting gel can also be
purchased affordably at almost any theatrical shop.
Lighting is among the most innovative of the theatrical
arts. New instruments, colors, and techniques are constantly
being developed. The design must always serve the entire
production, but the ways that can be achieved are endless.
The Hardware
Light for the stage may be provided by an elaborate and exten-
sive assortment of professional lighting instruments, miles of
cable, and stacks of dimmers, all designed to meet the needs
of the script and performance. However, few school stages are
equipped for the kind of lighting effects that can be achieved
on a Broadway stage. The lighting for a small production might
be achieved through the careful use of a few light bulbs
mounted on coffee cans and controlled by household wall
switches. In either situation, an understanding of what the
hardware is able to do and how it should be handled for safety
and maximum effectiveness is essential.
Many types of lighting equipment are used in the theater.
They can be grouped into five main categories:
• Lighting instruments • Control systems
• Mounting equipment • Beam modification equipment
• Electrical systems
The following discussion focuses mainly on lighting instru-
ments and mounts—equipment you will need to be familiar
with to fulfill requirement 3(g).
Around hot lights,
be careful not to
burn yourself
or melt the fabric
or plastic you
are using for
special effects.


70 THEATER
Lighting the Stage.
Lighting Instruments
Border and strip lights. A long, narrow trough that contains
several lights in a row is called a border light or strip light.
The term border lights tends to refer to permanently installed
continuous troughs that cross the entire stage. Strip lights are
usually 6- to 8-foot-long portable sections of lights.
Ellipsoidal reflector spotlights. Also known as lekos or kleig
lights, these spotlights are the primary lighting instrument in
modern theater. These spotlights are used in virtually every
location in the theater and for almost every possible purpose
of stage lighting.
LAMP ACCESS
GATE
SHUTTER
PATTERN-HOLDER
SLOT LENS TUBE
COLOR-
HOLDER
SLOTS
LENSESBARRELREFLECTOR
LAMP
SOCKET
A B C
Ellipsoidal
reflector
spotlights.
(A) Traditional
old-generation
ellipsoidal;
(B) axial
ellipsoidal—
lamp is on the
centerline axis of
the lens
and reflector;
(C) new
generation
ellipsoidal.
Strip light
Ellipsoidal reflector spotlight


THEATER 71
Fresnel. A fresnel (pronounced fray-nul)
spotlight produces a soft-edged beam of
concentrated illumination. This instrument
is distinguished by its lens. If you look at
it from the front, you see that the lens has
a series of circles carved in it, but from
the back, the flat surface is textured. This
relatively thin piece of glass creates the
effect of a very thick plano-convex lens.
PAR can. One of the most practical theatrical lighting instru-
ments available, the PAR can has a simple housing with a
yoke, pipe clamp, color holder slot, and socket. The heart
of the instrument is the parabolic aluminized reflector or
PAR lamp, which is mounted at the back of the housing
with a spring ring to hold it in place. The modern PAR
can provides great flexibility. Just by changing out the
lamp, it can project direct light at a specific object or
illuminate a particular area. These lamps generally have
a long life and are very durable. They will withstand
severe shock, and when cool, it is completely safe
to touch the glass portion of the lamp.
6-inch fresnelFresnel lens,
side view
Fresnel lens: (A) back; (B) section; (C) front
A B C
PAR can


72 THEATER
Lighting the Stage.
floodlight. A
light with a large
reflector and a
high-wattage
lamp that
produces a broad
fill of light on
the stage. Its
beam is not
easily controlled,
but the light
spreads
illumination
evenly.
Scoops. Also called ellipsoidal
reflector floods (ERFs), scoops are
the most common floodlights in
the modern theater.
Spotlights. Spotlights are intended
to illuminate a specific area of the
stage with a controlled beam of light.
Spotlights use plano-convex lenses,
which are flat on one side and curved
outward on the opposite side.
Lighting Instrument Terms
YOKE
YOKE
BOLT
PIPE CLAMP
SAFETY CABLE
HOOD
YOKE
REFLECTOR
LAMP
PIGTAIL
CONNECTOR
COLOR-HOLDER
SLOTSSOCKET
Typical lighting instrument
Scoop with rotatable
square color-holder slot
A spotlight throws an intense beam on a defined area.
Often when a spotlight is used, it is focused on a sin-
gle actor and the rest of the stage is blacked out.


THEATER 73
.Lighting the Stage
C S11 S14 F A PS
G T R PAR
Lamp shapes: C is candelabra, S11 and S14 are spheres, F is flame, A is apple, PS is
pear shape, G is globe, T is tube, R is reflector, and PAR is projector and reflector.
F G H I
A B C D E
Lamp Bases. As you become familiar with the different styles of lamp
shapes, you also will learn more about the different types of lamp
bases. Here are some of the more typical lamp bases you might see
in theater lighting: (A) medium screw base; (B) mogul screw base; (C)
miniature screw base; (D) mogul prefocus; (E) medium bipost; (F) mogul
bipost; (G) medium two pin; (H) double ended; (I) medium end pin.
Lamps (light bulbs). Designed to fit specific equipment based
on the design of the socket, reflector, lens (when used), and
overall size of the lighting instrument.


74 THEATER
Lighting the Stage.
Pigtail. The wire that comes out of the lighting
instrument and ends in a plug.
Pipe clamp. The clamp that is attached to the yoke by a bolt,
used to hang the lighting instrument from a pipe.
Safety chains and cables.
Used with all lighting equip-
ment, this extra piece of
lightweight cable or chain is
wrapped around the pipe from
which the lighting instrument is
hanging and hung through the yoke.
If the light should start to fall to the stage,
the safety cable will catch it.
Socket. The part of the fixture that holds the lamp bulb in
place and conducts power to it. Although sockets are a fairly
permanent part of most lighting instruments, they will wear
out with age. Damaged sockets can be replaced.
Yoke. The metal band that makes a loop around the lighting
instrument and bolts to it on each side.
A B
Mounting hardware:
yoke (A) and
hanger iron (B).
Safety cable


THEATER 75
.Lighting the Stage
Many combinations of these and other stage lights will
be used in a professional production to achieve beautiful
results. Stage lighting is impossible to learn without practice.
If possible, meet requirement 3(g) by actually handling the
lighting for a play.
Lighting operators control lights using an electronic control board.
Caution: Whenever you are changing
lamps on any fixture, always be sure
that the circuit is turned off and the
light is unplugged. Never touch the
glass part of any bulb.





THEATER 77
.Designing Costumes
Designing Costumes
In much the same way that a set designer dresses the stage
appropriately, the costume designer enhances a play by dress-
ing the actors appropriately. The first step in costume design-
ing is research. You must read the script and then study the
time period in which the play takes place.
For requirement 3(d), you are to design five costumes
for a play set in a historical time. Suppose you choose a play
that is set in 16th-century England or
19th-century South Africa. Or maybe
your play is William Shakespeare’s
Antony and Cleopatra, set in ancient
Rome. Or perhaps you choose a play
with an American Revolutionary War
or Civil War theme. How do you
find out how people dressed in those
times and places?
If you have access to the
internet, begin your search online
(with your parent or guardian’s
permission). The Museum of the City
of New York’s Costume Collection
and the Metropolitan Museum of
Art have incredible online resources,
whether you are researching the type
of hat a Confederate general would
have worn or what type of shoes
were popular in the Victorian era.
Go to the library and look for costume and history books
that show what people wore in different eras of history and
parts of the world. Then, using your imagination, adapt the
illustrations found in those books to the characters in your
play. Do not just copy some drawings from a book or down-
load another designer’s work. Add your own touches, while
staying true to the period in which your play is set.


78 THEATER
Design Sketches
After you have chosen the play and studied its period in
history, you need to sketch your ideas for costumes.
Preliminary drawings help the costume designer in two
ways. First, the sketches are your initial means of visual
communication with the director. The director will be able to
see how you envision the costumes will look. And secondly,
most designers discover through the preliminary sketch
process how the costumes
will look.
Rarely do costume design-
ers conjure up complete,
detailed costumes and repre-
sent them on paper. The mind
is more apt to visualize bits
and pieces that reveal charac-
ter types. You may decide, for
example, that the sleeves should
be long and flowing; you may
know that the skirt must trail on
the ground. However, it is only
when you begin sketching that
the individual ideas and images
come together into a design.
A color sample
swatch done
in watercolor
shows the
palette of colors
the designer
has chosen for
a character’s
costumes.
Working closely with the director helps a designer create
costumes suited to the play and the era.


THEATER 79
.Designing Costumes
Preliminary pencil sketches
Start sketching before you have everything in your
mind in complete detail. You will find that as you
sketch you will start to design.


80 THEATER
Designing Costumes.
After doing some research and studying the script, you
can start to sketch simple drawings that reflect how you think
the characters should look. Add swatches (pieces) of fabric to
your design with notes to indicate what fabrics will be used for
what purpose. Once you have satisfactory preliminary sketches,
use colored pencils or colored artists’ chalk to give your designs
the colors, textures, and patterns you want to portray.
Fabric swatches
help complete
the design.


THEATER 81
.Designing Costumes


A makeup session at Theatre TCU, Fort Worth, Texas


THEATER 83
.Using Stage Makeup
As you become skilled at applying makeup, you will
find it easy and fun to make up yourself or a friend
as almost any character, from a clown to a patch-
eyed pirate to Abraham Lincoln. Try many characters.
Requirement 3(e) asks you to apply makeup to your-
self or a friend as one of four characters, but you will
enjoy trying many other characterizations. You can
also use whiteface makeup when you perform as a
mime. Check out books on mime and stage makeup
at your local library to learn specific techniques for
various characters.
Using Stage Makeup
Requirement 3(e) calls for you to show real skill in hair and
makeup design. If you have ever seen a theatrical play or
circus and glimpsed the actors or performers after the lights go
down but before they remove their stage makeup, you may be
shocked to see just how much they are wearing. Under stage
lights and from a distance, stage makeup dramatically heightens
the “presence” of an actor or actress. Up close without the
lights and illusion of theater, these same actors may look like
garish Mardi Gras figures.


84 THEATER
Using Stage Makeup.
Purposes of Makeup
In the theater, makeup has several purposes.
• It adds to the actor’s characterization of a role. If the actor is
playing an old man or woman, he or she ought to look like
an old person to the audience.
• It is easier for the other actors to play their parts properly
because they are reacting to the old person, not to someone
down the street who attends the same school they do.
• It helps the audience see the actors clearly. The bright stage
lighting tends to wash out an actor’s face unless his features
are emphasized by makeup.


THEATER 85
.Using Stage Makeup
Makeup Equipment
To do a proper job of applying makeup, you need a kit with
some basic items. These can be fairly expensive, so borrow a
kit if you can. Perhaps the school drama department or the
community theater has one you can borrow. Most of the mate-
rials can be bought at a discount store, but the cost will be
high if you must buy everything yourself.
Basic Makeup Kit
Here is what you need for a basic makeup kit.
■■ Cold cream or liquid makeup remover
■■ Foundation or greasepaint in assorted colors
■■ Crème and dry rouge in assorted colors,
rouge brush
■■ Lipsticks in assorted colors, lip brush
■■ Eye shadows, eye shadow brushes
■■ Face powder in assorted colors
■■ Silk sponge, powder puff, powder brush
■■ Eyeliners (blue, gray, maroon),
eyeliner brush
■■ Nose putty
■■ Spirit gum, spirit gum remover
■■ Crepe hair in assorted colors (including
your own hair color)
■■ Scissors, comb, hand mirror
■■ Absorbent cotton, tissues
Using all this equipment requires much
practice and a steady hand to achieve the
effects you want. Ask your counselor or
someone else in your community who is
knowledgeable about theater for advice on
making up.


86 THEATER
Using Stage Makeup.
Making Up
Here are a few tips that may be useful as you make up as
a historical figure, a clown, an extraterrestrial, or a monster
should you choose requirement 3(e).
• The face should be absolutely clean before you begin
applying makeup.
• Apply foundation or greasepaint first. It gives the proper
color and base.
• To give a monster or an extraterrestrial some grotesque
bumps, use nose putty, which is soft plastic material that
sticks best to dry skin. Put it on before applying foundation
or greasepaint.
• To make a clown’s rubber ball nose, use a ball, cutting it
to fit over your nose. Stick it in place with adhesive tape
and spirit gum. Blend foundation or greasepaint to cover
the edge.
• To make a young, healthy person look old or sick, lighten
the lips and cheeks. Using eye shadow, darken the area
around the eyes and put lowlights in the cheeks to make
them look old and shrunken.
• To give yourself a bald head, use a tight-fitting bathing cap
with slits cut for your ears.
• To put scars on a monster, draw them with dark lipstick or
black liner and powder them.
To remove makeup, rub your face with cold cream or liquid
makeup remover until the makeup is dissolved. Around your
eyes use only eye makeup remover—never petroleum jelly,
baby oil, or anything other than remover intended for eye
makeup, as this could cause an infection around your eyes.
Then wipe your face with tissues until all the grease is off.
Wash thoroughly with soap and warm water.
With makeup, you can turn anyone into
Frankenstein. All you need is a lot of practice.


To make yourself look older, frown and wrinkle your forehead. With eye shadow,
mark in the wrinkles.





THEATER 89
.What’s Next?
What’s Next?
When you have earned the Theater merit badge, you will have
mastered some of the basics of work in drama. You can learn
much more about the intricacies of theater in special schools
and workshops.
One excellent way to learn more is to join a children’s or
community theater troupe. Search out these opportunities and
offer your services. You may be given such unglamorous work
as painting scenery or ushering patrons to their seats before
performances. But you will learn something every time you
step inside the theater, not to mention having fun and gaining
valuable experience.
Study great plays at your public library. Search
out plays on film at both your library and local
video store.
As the curtain falls on this merit badge, another curtain is
rising somewhere in your world. Get involved in theater. Act in
a Scout skit. Volunteer for school plays. Join a theater group.
Read and watch plays. Scouting stresses learning by doing. So,
too, does the theater.


90 THEATER


THEATER 91
.Theater Resources
Theater Resources
Scouting Literature
Art, Communication, Journalism,
Model Design and Building,
Moviemaking, Painting, and Reading
merit badge pamphlets.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Aitken, Maria. Style: Acting in High
Comedy. Applause, 1996.
Bloom, Michael. Thinking Like a
Director: A Practical Handbook.
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, 2001.
Brown, John Russell, ed. The Oxford
Illustrated History of Theatre. Oxford
University Press, 2001.
Bruder, Melissa, et al. A Practical
Handbook for the Actor. Vintage
Books, 1986.
Campbell, Drew. Technical Theater
for Nontechnical People, 3rd ed.
Allworth Press, 2016.
Carter, Paul. Backstage Handbook: An
Illustrated Almanac of Technical
Information, 3rd ed. Broadway
Press, 1994.
Catron, Louis E., and Norman A. Bert.
The Elements of Playwriting,
2nd ed. Waveland Press, 2017.
Clurman, Harold. On Directing.
Touchstone Books, 1997.
Cohen, Edward M. Working on a New
Play. Limelight Editions, 1995.
Corson, Richard, James Glavan, and
Beverly Gore Norcross. Stage
Makeup, 10th ed. Routledge, 2009.
Fraser, Neil. Stage Lighting Explained.
Crowood Press, 2002.
Gillette, J. Michael. Theatrical Design
and Production: An Introduction
to Scenic Design and Construction,
Lighting, Sound, Costume, and
Makeup, 7th ed. McGraw-Hill, 2012.
Ingham, Rosemary, and Liz Covey.
The Costume Designer’s Handbook,
2nd ed. Heinemann, 1992.
Kipnis, Claude. The Mime Book,
2nd ed. Meriwether Publishing, 1988.
Korty, Carol. Writing Your Own Plays:
Creating, Adapting, Improvising,
2nd ed. Players Press, 2000.
Novelly, Maria C. Theatre Games for
Young Performers: Improvisations
and Exercises for Developing Acting
Skills. Meriwether Publishing, 1985.
Pecktal, Lynn. Designing and Drawing
for the Theatre. McGraw-Hill, 1994.


92 THEATER
Theater Resources.
Pennington, Lee. The Actor’s Edge.
Marble Falls Press, 1995.
Peterson, Lenka, and Dan O’Conner.
Kids Take the Stage: Helping Young
People Discover the Creative Outlet
of Theater. Back Stage Books, 1997.
Smith, Ronn. American Set Design 2.
Theatre Communications Group,
1991.
Swinfield, Rosemarie. Stage Makeup
Step-By-Step. Betterway Books,
1995.
Walters, Graham. Stage Lighting
Step-by-Step: The Complete Guide
on Setting the Stage With Light
to Get Dramatic Results. Betterway
Books, 1997.
Yager, Fred, and Jan Yager. Career
Opportunities in the Film Industry,
2nd ed. Checkmark Books, 2009.
Periodicals
Plays
897 Washington St. #600160
Newton, MA 02460
Telephone: 617-630-9100
Toll-free telephone: 800-630-5755
playsmagazine.com
Organizations and Websites
American Association of
Community Theatre
1300 Gendy St.
Fort Worth, TX 76107
Telephone: 817-732-3177
aact.org
CreativeFuture
creativefuture.org
Educational Theatre Association
4805 Montgomery Road, Suite 400
Cincinnati, Ohio 45212
Telephone: 513-421-3900
schooltheatre.org
Masterpiece Theatre
pbs.org/wgbh/masterpiece/
about-masterpiece
Metropolitan Museum of Art
Costume Institute
1000 Fifth Ave.
New York, NY 10028
Telephone: 212-535-7710
metmuseum.org
Museum of the City of New York
Costume and Textiles Collection
1220 Fifth Ave.
New York, NY 10029
Telephone: 212-534-1672
mcny.org/collections/costume-textiles
TheatreHistory.com
theatrehistory.com


THEATER 93
.Theater Resources
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Theatre
TCU, Texas Christian University,
Fort Worth, Texas, for the use of
props shown on pages 53 (sight-line
drawing), 54 (front elevation), and
75 (electronic control board). Scouting
America thanks the Addison Theatre
Centre Mainstage for the use of
the ground plan shown on page 54
(designed by Michael Robinson, drawn
by Scott Guenther) and the lighting
plot shown on page 68 (designed by
David Natinsky).
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Scouting America would like to
thank the following organizations and
individuals for their contributions to
the 1999 edition of the Theater merit
badge pamphlet, upon which this
edition is based.
Scout Troop 508, Irving, Texas
Scout Troop 1001, Richardson, Texas
Gemini Stage Lighting and Equipment
Co. Inc., Dallas, Texas
Haltom High School Theatre Arts
students of 1997–98 under super-
vision of Connie Sanchez, director,
Haltom High School Theatre Arts
program, Fort Worth, Texas
LaLonnie Lehman, Theatre TCU,
Texas Christian University,
Fort Worth, Texas
Lynne Moon, stylist
Kimberly G. Morris, costume designer
and makeup artist (She provided
the sketches used in the chapter
“Designing Costumes.”)
G. Joan Rambin, Stage West volunteer
Chris D. Shelton, drama major, Texas
Woman’s University, Denton, Texas
Stage West Theatre in Fort Worth,
Texas; Diane Anglim,
executive director
Scouting America also thanks those
who have contributed to previous
editions of this pamphlet.


94 THEATER
Theater Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Addison Theatre Center Mainstage,
courtesy—pages 54 (ground plan)
and 68
Lee Angle Photography Inc., Stage West
Productions, courtesy—page 65
Bill Evans & Associates, courtesy—
page 22 (Neil Simon)
Haltom High School, Fort Worth,
Texas—page 64 (both)
Dena Levitin, courtesy—
page 22 (August Wilson)
Kimberly G. Morris, courtesy—all
sketches on pages 76 and 79–81
Rogers and Cowan, courtesy—
page 33
Theatre TCU, Texas Christian University,
Fort Worth, Texas—page 54
(front elevation)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 20
(Shakespeare)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
Darrell Byers—pages 53, 75, 82, and 84
Gene Daniels—page 88
Daniel Giles—cover (playbill, actor,
mimes); pages 4, 7, 12–13 (all),
25–26 (Scout actors), 28–30 (all),
38 (all), 39–41 (all), 42 (“The rope”
mime), 43, 61 (Scout using staple
gun), 62–63 (all), and 87
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 56–57, 60, and 70–74


THEATER 95
.Theater Resources
Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.