SUSTAINABILITY


SUSTAINABILITY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
On our cover: The shy giant panda, one of the world’s
rarest animals, eats a lot of bamboo. As people cleared
more and more bamboo for building, industry, and
farming, the panda lost more of its food source and its
home. This great animal is also very slow to reproduce,
which contributes to its vulnerability. We now know that
the panda is endangered and needs to be protected.


Sustainability
1. Before starting work on any other requirements for this merit badge, write in
your own words the meaning of sustainability. Explain how you think conser-
vation and stewardship of our natural resources relate to sustainability. Have a
family meeting, and ask family members to write down what they think sus-
tainability means. Be sure to take notes. You will need this information again
for requirement 5.
2. Do the following:
Water. Do A AND either B OR C
(a) Develop and implement a plan that attempts to reduce your family’s water
usage. As a family, discuss water usage. To aid in your discussion, if past
water bills are available, you may choose to examine a few. As a family,
choose three ways to help reduce water consumption. Implement those ideas
for one month. Share what you learn with your counselor, and tell how you
think your plan affected your family’s water usage.


(b) Using a diagram you have created, explain to your counselor how your
household gets its clean water from a natural source and what happens
with the water after you use it. Include water that goes down the kitchen,
bathroom, and laundry drains, and any runoff from watering the yard or
washing the car. Tell two ways to preserve your family’s access to clean water
in the future.
(c) Discuss with your counselor two areas in the world that have been
affected by drought over the last three years. For each area, identify a water
conservation practice (successful or unsuccessful) that has been used. Tell
whether the practice was effective and why. Discuss what water conservation
practice you would have tried and why.
Food. Do A AND either B OR C.
(a) Develop and implement a plan that attempts to reduce your household
food waste. Establish a baseline and then track and record your results for two
weeks. Report your results to your family and counselor.
(b) Discuss with your counselor the ways individuals, families, and communi-
ties can create their own food sources (potted plants, family garden, rooftop
garden, neighborhood or community garden). Tell how this plan might con-
tribute to a more sustainable way of life if practiced globally.
(c) Discuss with your counselor factors that limit the availability of food and
food production in different regions of the world. Tell three ways these factors
influence the sustainability of worldwide food supplies.
Community. Do A AND either B OR C.
(a) Draw a rough sketch depicting how you would design a sustainable com-
munity. Share your sketch with your counselor, and explain how the housing,
work locations, shops, schools, and transportation systems affect energy, pol-
lution, natural resources, and the economy of the community.
(b) With your parent’s permission and your counselor’s approval, interview a
local architect, engineer, contractor, or building materials supplier. Find out
the factors that are considered when using sustainable materials in renovating
or building a home. Share what you learn with your counselor.
(c) Review a current housing needs assessment for your town, city, county, or
state. Discuss with your counselor how birth and death rates affect sufficient
housing, and how a lack of housing—or too much housing—can influence the
sustainability of a local or global area.
Energy. Do A AND either B OR C.
(a) Learn about the sustainability of different energy sources, including fossil
fuels, solar, wind, nuclear, hydropower, and geothermal. Find out how the
production and consumption of each of these energy sources affects the envi-
ronment and what the term “carbon footprint” means. Discuss what you learn
with your counselor, and explain how you think your family can reduce its
carbon footprint.


(b) Develop and implement a plan to reduce the consumption of one of your
family’s household utilities that consume energy, such as gas appliances, elec-
tricity, heating systems, or cooling systems. Examine your family’s bills for
that utility reflecting usage for three months (past or current). As a family,
choose three ways to help reduce consumption and be a better steward of this
resource. Implement those ideas for one month. Share what you learn with
your counselor, and tell how your plan affected your family’s usage.
(c) Evaluate your family’s fuel and transportation usage. Review your
family’s transportation-related bills (gasoline, diesel, electric, public
transportation, etc.) reflecting usage for three months (past or current).
As a family, choose three ways to help reduce consumption and be a better
steward of this resource. Implement those ideas for one month. Share
what you learn with your counselor, and tell how your plan affected your
family’s transportation habits.
Stuff. Do A AND either B OR C.
(a) Keep a log of the “stuff” your family purchases (excluding food items)
for two weeks. In your log, categorize each purchase as an essential need
(such as soap) or a desirable want (such as a DVD). Share what you learn
with your counselor.
(b) Plan a project that involves the participation of your family to identify the
“stuff” your family no longer needs. Complete your project by donating,
repurposing, or recycling these items.
(c) Discuss with your counselor how having too much “stuff” affects you,
your family, and your community. Include the following: the financial impact,
time spent, maintenance, health, storage, and waste. Include in your discus-
sion the practices that can be used to avoid accumulating too much “stuff.”
3. Do the following:
(a) Explain to your counselor how the planetary life-support systems (soil, cli-
mate, freshwater, atmospheric, nutrient, oceanic, ecosystems, and species)
support life on Earth and interact with one another.
(b) Tell how the harvesting or production of raw materials (by extraction or
recycling), along with distribution of the resulting products, consumption, and
disposal/repurposing, influences current and future sustainability thinking
and planning.
4. Explore TWO of the following categories. Have a discussion with your family
about the two you select. In your discussion, include your observations, and
best and worst practices. Share what you learn with your counselor.
(a) Plastic waste. Discuss the impact plastic waste has on the environment
(land, water, air). Learn about the number system for plastic recyclables, and
determine which plastics are more commonly recycled. Find out what the
trash vortex is and how it was formed.
(b) Electronic waste. Choose three electronic devices in your household. Find
out the average lifespan of each, what happens to these devices once they
pass their useful life, and whether they can be recycled in whole or part.
Discuss the impact of electronic waste on the environment.


(c) Food waste. Learn about the value of composting and how to start a
compost pile. Start a compost pile appropriate for your living situation. Tell
what can be done with the compost when it is ready for use.
(d) Species decline. Explain the term species (plant or animal) decline.
Discuss the human activities that contribute to species decline, what can be
done to help reverse the decline, and its impact on a sustainable environment.
(e) World population. Learn how the world’s population affects the sustain-
ability of Earth. Discuss three human activities that may contribute to putting
Earth at risk, now and in the future.
(f) Climate change. Find a world map that shows the pattern of temperature
change for a period of at least 100 years. Share this map with your counselor,
and discuss three factors that scientists believe affect the global weather
and temperature. Discuss with your counselor three impacts of climate change
and how these changes could impact sustainability of food, water, or
other resources.
5. Do the following:
(a) After completing requirements 1 through 4, have a family meeting.
Discuss what your family has learned about what it means to be a sustainable
citizen. Talk about the behavioral changes and life choices your family can
make to live more sustainably. Share what you learn with your counselor.
(b) Discuss with your counselor how living by the Scout Oath and Scout Law
in your daily life helps promote sustainability and good stewardship.
6. Learn about career opportunities in the sustainability field. Pick one and find
out the education, training, and experience required. Discuss what you have
learned with your counselor and explain why this career might interest you.


94 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability Resources.
Sustainability Resources
Scouting Literature
Boy Scout Handbook; Fieldbook;
Energy, Environmental Science, Fish and
Wildlife Management, Forestry, Nature,
Oceanography, Plant Science, Public Health,
Soil and Water Conservation, and Weather
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Kaye, Cathryn Berger, and Philippe Cousteau.
Going Blue: A Teen Guide to Saving Our
Oceans, Lakes, Rivers, & Wetlands. Free
Spirit Publishing, 2010.
Petronis, Lexi. 47 Things You Can Do for the
Environment. Zest Books, 2012.
Roa, Michael L. Environmental Science
Activities Kit: Ready-to-Use Lessons, Labs,
and Worksheets for Grades 7–12, 2nd ed.
Jossey-Bass, 2008.
Savedge, Jenn. The Green Teen: The
Eco-Friendly Teen’s Guide to Saving the
Planet. New Society Publishers, 2009.
Sivertsen, Linda, and Tosh Sivertsen.
Generation Green: The Ultimate Teen
Guide to Living an Eco-Friendly Life.
Simon Pulse, 2008.
Organizations and Websites
AAS Center for Science, Technology
and Sustainability
Website: www.aaas.org
American Chemical Society Green
Chemistry Institute
Website: www.chemistry.org/
greenchemistryinstitute
American Forest and Paper Association
Website: http://www.afandpa.org
American Institute of
Biological Sciences
Website: http://www.aibs.org
Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies
Telephone: 202-624-7890
Website: http://www.fishwildlife.org
Center for Biological Diversity
Website: http://www.biologicaldiversity.org/
news/center/articles/2010/
new-scientist-02-24-2010.html
Eartheasy
Website: http://eartheasy.com/grow_com-
post.html
Ecological Society of America
Website: www.esa.org
EnviroLink Network
Website: http://www.envirolink.org
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website (with your
parent’s permission) at http://www.
scoutstuff.org for a complete listing
of all merit badge pamphlets and
other helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.


SUSTAINABILITY 95
.Sustainability Resources
Environmental Protection Agency
Telephone: 202-272-0167
Website: http://www.epa.gov and
http://water.epa.gov
Global Footprint Network
Website: http://www.footprintnetwork.org
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
Toll-free telephone: 800-332-4100
Website: http://www.lnt.org
NASA Climate Kids
Website: http://climatekids.nasa.gov
The Nature Conservancy
Website: http://www.nature.org
Natural Resources Conservation Service
Telephone: 202-720-3210
Website: http://www.nrcs.usda.gov
Reuseit
Website: http://www.reuseit.com/
learn-more/top-facts/impact-on-oceans
Society of American Foresters
Website: http://www.eforester.org
Sustainable Forestry Initiative
Website: http://www.sfiprogram.org
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Websites: http://www.epa.gov/
climatestudents
http://www.epa.gov/P3
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-9453
Website: http://www.fws.gov
USDA Forest Service
Website: http://www.fs.fed.us
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America greatly appreciates
the tireless efforts of members of the BSA
Sustainability Merit Badge Leadership Team
for their work in creating this merit badge.
Without their vision, insight, expertise, and
time, this merit badge and pamphlet would
not have been possible. We would especially
like to acknowledge Jonathan Harmon. He
not only encouraged his family to live a
more sustainable way of life, but it was his
inspiration that brought this merit badge to life.
BSA Sustainability Merit Badge
Leadership Team
Scott Berger, chairman—Distinguished Eagle
Scout; Silver Beaver; chairman, Merit
Badge Maintenance Task Force; member,
Advancement Committee
Steve Bowen—Distinguished Eagle Scout;
Silver Buffalo; chairman, New Merit
Badge Task Force; member, Advancement
and Program Content committees
David Disney—Silver Beaver; Whitney M.
Young Jr. Service Award; BSA National
Executive Advisory Council; senior vice
president, JE Dunn Construction
Scott Harmon—Eagle Scout
BSA Sustainability Merit Badge
Content Team
Scott Harmon, chairman—Eagle Scout; vice
president, Sustainability and Business
Development, Enlighted Inc.
Andrew Collier—Eagle Scout; MBA
student, Berkeley-Hass School of
Business, University of California
Jonathan Harmon—Eagle Scout;
Environmental Science graduate,
Colorado College
Brandy Moore—Girl Scout; director,
Customer Solutions Education Segment,
Schneider Electric Inc.
Don Moseley—Eagle Scout; senior manager,
Sustainable Facilities, Wal-Mart Stores Inc.
John Murphy—Eagle Scout; president, Site
Integration Studio, LLC
Robert Parkhurst—Eagle Scout; director,
Agriculture Greenhouse Gas Markets,
Environmental Defense Fund
Chris Ratto—Eagle Scout; director of
Sustainability, Safeway Inc.
Tyler Rogers—Eagle Scout; engagement
manager, Opower Inc.
BSA Sustainability Merit Badge Advisory
Review Panel: Harry Allen, Jeff Birkby, Lee
F. Canel, Barry Graden, Bradley E. Haddock,
Michael Huneke, Lyle Knight, Frank
McAllister, Glenn Prickett, Ray Rothrock,
Allison Schapker, and Jigar Shah.