ENERGY

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

ENERGY

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Energy
1. Do the following:
(a) With your parent’s permission, use the internet to find a blog, podcast,
website, or an article on the use or conservation of energy. Discuss with your
counselor what details in the article were interesting to you, the questions it
raises, and what ideas it addresses that you do not understand.
(b) After you have completed requirements 2 through 8, revisit your source
for requirement 1a. Explain to your counselor what you have learned in completing the requirements that helps you better understand the article.
2. Show you understand energy forms and conversions by doing the following:
(a) Explain how THREE of the following devices use energy, and explain their
energy conversions: toaster, greenhouse, lightbulb, bow drill, cell phone, nuclear
reactor, sweat lodge.
(b) Construct a system that makes at least two energy conversions and explain
this to your counselor.
3. Show you understand energy efficiency by explaining to your counselor a
common example of a situation where energy moves through a system to
produce a useful result. Do the following:
(a) Identify the parts of the system that are affected by the energy movement.
(b) Name the system’s primary source of energy.
(c) Identify the useful outcomes of the system.
(d) Identify the energy losses of the system.

4. Conduct an energy audit of your home. Keep a 14-day log that records what
you and your family did to reduce energy use. Include the following in your
report and, after the 14-day period, discuss what you have learned with
your counselor.
(a) List the types of energy used in your home such as electricity, wood, oil,
liquid petroleum, and natural gas, and tell how each is delivered and measured,
and the current cost; OR record the transportation fuel used, miles driven, miles
per gallon, and trips using your family car or another vehicle.
(b) Describe ways you and your family can use energy resources more wisely.
In preparing your discussion, consider the energy required for the things you do
and use on a daily basis (cooking, showering, using lights, driving, watching TV,
using the computer). Explain what is meant by sustainable energy sources.
Explain how you can change your energy use through reuse and recycling.
5. In a notebook, identify and describe five examples of energy waste in your
school or community. Suggest in each case possible ways to reduce this waste.
Describe the idea of trade-offs in energy use. In your response, do the following:
(a) Explain how the changes you suggest would lower costs, reduce pollution,
or otherwise improve your community.
(b) Explain what changes to routines, habits, or convenience are necessary to
reduce energy waste. Tell why people might resist the changes you suggest.
6. Prepare pie charts showing the following information, and explain to your
counselor the important ideas each chart reveals. Tell where you got your
information. Explain how cost affects the use of a nonrenewable energy
resource and makes alternatives practical.
(a) The energy resources that supply the United States with most of its energy
(b) The share of energy resources used by the United States that comes from
other countries
(c) The proportion of energy resources used by homes, businesses, industry,
and transportation
(d) The fuels used to generate America’s electricity
(e) The world’s known and estimated primary energy resource reserves
7. Tell what is being done to make FIVE of the following energy systems produce
more usable energy. In your explanation, describe the technology, cost,
environmental impacts, and safety concerns.
•

Biomass digesters or waste-to-energy plants

•

Cogeneration plants

•

Fossil fuel power plants

•

Fuel cells

•

Geothermal power plants

•

Nuclear power plants

•

Solar power systems

•

Tidal energy, wave energy, or ocean thermal energy conversion devices

•

Wind turbines

8. Find out what opportunities are available for a career in energy. Choose one
position that interests you and describe the education and training required.

Energy Information Resources.

Energy Information Resources
Scouting Literature
Chemistry, Citizenship in the
Community, Citizenship in the World,
Electricity, Electronics, Engineering,
Environmental Science, Geology, Home
Repairs, Nuclear Science, Oceanography,
Plumbing, Pulp and Paper, Radio,
Railroading, Space Exploration,
Sustainablity, Truck Transportation, and
Weather merit badge pamphlets
Visit the Boy Scouts of America’s
official retail website at
http://www.scoutstuff.org for a
complete listing of all merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Books
Bickerstaff, Linda. Oil Power of the
Future: New Ways of Turning
Petroleum Into Energy. Rosen, 2002.

Chiras, Dan, Mick Sagrillo, and Ian
Woofenden. Power From the Wind:
Achieving Energy Independence. New
Society Publishers, 2009.
Draper, Allison Stark. Hydropower of the
Future: New Ways of Turning Water
Into Energy. Rosen, 2003.
Ferguson, Charles D. Nuclear Energy:
What Everyone Needs to Know.
Oxford University Press, 2011.
Giacobello, John. Nuclear Power of the
Future: New Ways of Turning Atoms
Into Energy. Rosen, 2004.
Goldemberg, Jose. Energy: What
Everyone Needs to Know. Oxford
University Press, 2012.
Graham, Ian S. Fossil Fuels: A Resource
Our World Depends On. Heinemann,
2004.
———. Fossil Fuels, Energy Forever?
Series. Hodder Wayland, 2001.

Boxwell, Michael. Solar Electricity
Handbook, 7th ed. Greenstream
Publishing, 2012.

———. Geothermal and Bio-Energy,
Energy Forever? Series. Hodder
Wayland, 2001.

Boyle, Godfrey. Renewable Energy:
Power for a Sustainable Future, 3rd
ed. Oxford University Press, 2012.

———. Water Power, Energy Forever?
Series. Raintree, 1998.

Challoner, Jack, and Clive Streeter.
Eyewitness: Energy. DK
Publishing, 2000.
94

ENERGY

Hawkes, Nigel. New Energy Sources.
Copper Beech, 2000.

.Energy Information Resources

Hayhurst, Chris. Biofuel Power of the
Future: New Ways of Turning Organic
Matter Into Energy. Rosen, 2003.

EIA Kid’s Page
Energy Information Administration
Website: http://www.eia.doe.gov/kids

———. Hydrogen Power of the Future:
New Ways of Turning Fuel Cells Into
Energy. Rosen, 2003.

EarthTrends: Energy and Resources
World Resources Institute
Website: http://earthtrends.wri.org

Jones, Susan. Solar Power of the Future:
New Ways of Turning Sunlight Into
Energy. Rosen, 2003.
Kidd, J.S., and Renee A. Kidd. Nuclear
Power: The Study of Quarks and
Sparks. Chelsea House, 2006.
MacKay, David J.C. Sustainable
Energy—Without the Hot Air. UIT
Cambridge Ltd., 2009.
Parker, Steve. Fuels for the Future.
Raintree, 1998.
Riddle, John. Coal Power of the Future:
New Ways of Turning Coal Into
Energy. Rosen, 2003.
Schobert, Harold. Energy: The Basics.
Taylor & Francis, 2013.
Tecco, Betsy Dru. Wind Power of the
Future: New Ways of Turning Wind
Into Energy. Rosen, 2003.
Tester, Jefferson W., Elisabeth M. Drake,
et al. Sustainable Energy: Choosing
Among Options, 2nd. ed. The MIT
Press, 2012.

Organizations and Websites
GENERAL ENERGY INFORMATION
Energy Efficiency and
Renewable Energy
U.S. Department of Energy
1000 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20585
Toll-free telephone: 800-342-5363
Website: http://www.eere.energy.gov

ENERGY EFFICIENCY AND
CONSERVATION
EnergyHog.org
Alliance to Save Energy
Website: http://www.energyhog.org
PowerSave Schools
Alliance to Save Energy
Website:
http://www.powersaveschools.org/
Home Energy Saver
Energy Technologies Area,
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Website: http://www.hes.lbl.gov
Energy Star
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Website: http://www.energystar.gov
ENERGY SOURCES AND DATA
American Wind Energy Association
Telephone: 202-383-2500
Website: http://www.awea.org
National Hydropower Association
Telephone: 202-682-1700
Website: http://www.hydro.org
Nuclear Energy Institute
Telephone: 202-739-8000
Website: http://www.nei.org
National Renewable
Energy Laboratory
Telephone: 303-275-3000
Website: http://www.nrel.gov

ENERGY

95

Energy Information Resources.

Acknowledgments

The Boy Scouts of America thanks
Dennis E. Showers, Ph.D., for his work
as principal author of this new edition
of the Energy merit badge pamphlet.
Dr. Showers serves as director of the
Center for Science, Mathematics and
Technology Education and associate
professor of Science Education at State
University of New York (SUNY) at
Geneseo. He received the Xerox Center
for Multicultural Teacher Education
Award of Excellence in 2003. A longtime supporter of the BSA, Dr. Showers
also wrote the former Atomic Energy
merit badge pamphlet and cowrote the
current Nuclear Science pamphlet.
Contributing additional expertise
to this revision of Energy was Robert J.
“Bob” Silva, PE, PG, program analyst
with the U.S. Department of Energy’s
Office of Fossil Energy. Thanks also to
Danrick Alexander for his early involvement with this project.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the Merit Badge Maintenance Task
Force for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.

Photo and Illustration Credits
Warren Gretz, Office of Science and
Technical Information, Department of
Energy/National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, courtesy—pages 36 and 57
NASA, courtesy—cover (sun), page 29
Shutterstock.com, courtesy—cover
(lightbulb, ©somchaij; can, ©Studio
Araminta; wind turbine, ©Chepe
Nicoli; gas nozzle, ©nexus 7;
dam, ©mariakraynova); pages 7
96

ENERGY

(©Kichigin), 13 (©martin33), 15
(©Jens Holzmann), 16 (©Olegusk),
18 (©Aphelleon), 19 (©Vadim
Sadovski), 21 (©itsmejust), 22
(©bowowbox), 27 (power plant,
©Nobor; lightning, ©Igor Zh.), 30
(©Raskolnikov), 32 (©curraheeshutter), 34 (©Ivan Martynyuk), 37
(©njaj), 44 (©Jaromir Chalabala), 45
(©Sascha Hahn), 47 (©Miramiska),
50 (©Tom Mc Nemar), 52 (©gresei),
53 (©SARIN KUNTHONG), 62
(©Alex Kh), 67 (background, ©janez
volmajer), 68 (©KAMONRAT), 72
(©Natalia Pushchina), 74 (©J.D.S),
76 (©Rafal Olkis), 79 (©Kenneth
Keifer), 85 (©elxeneize), and 87
(©Dan Kosmayer)
U.S. Department of Energy, Office of
Energy Efficiency and Renewable
Energy, courtesy—page 59
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—page 26
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 88
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Tom Copeland Jr.—page 60
John McDearmon—pages 20 (both), 24,
35, 42–43 (both), 80–82 (all)
Brian Payne—page 23
Randy Piland—pages 8, 11, 12, 38, 48,
49, 51, and 92

