ROWING

STEM-Based

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

ROWING

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
1. Do the following:
a.	Explain to your counselor the most likely hazards you
may encounter while participating in rowing activities,
including weather- and water-related hazards, and what
you should do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and
respond to these hazards.
b.	Review prevention, symptoms, and first-aid treatment
for the following injuries or illnesses that can occur
while rowing: blisters, hypothermia, heat-related illnesses,
dehydration, sunburn, sprains, and strains.
c.	Review the BSA Safety Afloat policy. Explain to your
counselor how this applies to rowing activities.
2. Before completing requirements 4, 5, 6, and 7, successfully
complete the BSA swimmer test.
3. Review the characteristics of life jackets most appropriate
for rowing and why one must always be worn while rowing.
Then demonstrate how to select and fit a life jacket.
4.	Do ONE of the following:
a.	Alone or with a passenger, do the following in either a
fixed-seat or sliding-seat rowboat:
			 (1) Launch.
			

(2)	Row in a straight line for 100 yards. Stop, pivot, and
return to the starting point.

			

(3)	Backwater in a straight line for 25 yards. Make a
turn under way and return to the starting point.

35943
ISBN 978-0-8395-3404-4
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2021 Printing

			

(4)	Land and moor or rack your craft.

			

(5)	Tie the following mooring knots—clove hitch,
roundturn with two half-hitches, bowline,
Wellman’s knot, and mooring hitch.

b.	Participate as a rowing team member in a competitive
rowing meet. The team may be sponsored by a school,
club, or Scout unit. The meet must include competition
between two or more teams with different sponsors.
Complete at least 10 hours of team practice prior to
the meet.
5. Do ONE of the following:
a.	In a fixed-seat rowboat, come alongside a pier and
help a passenger into the boat. Pull away from the pier,
change positions with your passenger, and demonstrate
sculling over the stern or side. Resume your rowing
position, return alongside the pier, and help your
passenger out of the boat.
b.	In a sliding-seat rowboat, come alongside a pier and,
with your buddy assisting you, get out onto the pier.
Help your buddy into the boat. Reverse roles with your
buddy and repeat the procedure.
6.	Participate in a swamped boat drill including righting and
stabilizing the craft, reboarding in deep water, and making
headway. Tell why you should stay with a swamped boat.
7.	Alone in a rowboat, push off from the shore or a pier.
Row 20 yards to a swimmer. While giving instructions
to the swimmer, pivot the boat so that the swimmer can
hold on to the stern. Tow the swimmer to shore.
8. Describe the following:
a.	Types of craft used in commercial, competitive,
and recreational rowing.
b.	Four common boatbuilding materials. Give some
positive and negative points of each.
c.	Types of oarlocks used in competitive and
recreational rowing.

ROWING    3

9. Discuss the following:
a.	The advantage of feathering oars while rowing
b.	Precautions regarding strong winds and heavy
waves, and boat-handling procedures in rough
water and windstorms
c.	How to properly fit out and maintain a boat in season,
and how to prepare and store a boat for winter
d.	How to determine the proper length of oars
e.	The differences between fixed-seat and slidingseat rowing
f.	The different meanings of the term sculling in fixedand sliding-seat rowing
g.	The health benefits from rowing for exercise

4    ROWING

Rowing Resources
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Deck of First Aid; Basic
Illustrated Wilderness First Aid;
Emergency First Aid pocket guide; Be
Prepared First Aid Book; Safety Afloat
pamphlet; Sea Scout Manual; Canoeing,
Kayaking, Motorboating, and SmallBoat Sailing merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.

Cunningham, Frank. The Sculler at
Ease. Grandview Street Press, 1999.
Halberstam, David. The Amateurs: The
Story of Four Young Men and Their
Quest for an Olympic Gold Medal.
Ballantine Books, 1996.
Hamilton, Gordon. Sculling in a
Nutshell. Gordon Hamilton, 2013.
Maybery, Keith. Rowing: The Essential
Guide to Equipment and Techniques.
Stackpole Books, 2002.
McArthur, John. High Performance
Rowing. Crowood Press, 1997.
Thompson, Luke. Essential Boating
for Teens. Children’s Press, 2000.

Magazines
Books
Boyne, Daniel J. Essential Sculling:
An Introduction to Basic Strokes,
Equipment, Boat Handling,
Technique, and Power.
Lyons Press, 2000.
Brown, Daniel James. The Boys in the
Boat: Nine Americans and Their
Epic Quest for Gold at the 1936
Berlin Olympics. Penguin, 2014.
Churbuck, D.C. The Book of Rowing.
Overlook Press, 2008.

Rowing Magazine
Rivermill Suite 440
85 Mechanic St.
Lebanon, NH 03766
Telephone: 603-448-5090
Website: www.rowingnews.com

Organizations and Websites
USRowing
2 Wall St.
Princeton, NJ 08540
Toll-free telephone:
800-314-4ROW (4769)
Website: www.usrowing.org

ROWING    5

Acknowledgments

The Boy Scouts of America has
promoted and taught rowing skills since
its founding. That commitment continues
today. This Rowing merit badge pamphlet
was reviewed and updated by members of
the National Aquatics Task Force and other
rowing experts. We gratefully acknowledge
the assistance of the following individuals:
Bill Hall, Marietta, Georgia, team lead
Drew Bedson, Peachtree City, Georgia
David Bell, Ponca City, Oklahoma
Willie Black, Princeton, New Jersey
Murphy Green, Bowling Green, Kentucky
Jason Kasiorek, Grand Rapids, Michigan
Dan McGuire, Memphis, Tennessee
Frank Mills, Canton, Georgia
Arthur Mittelstaedt, Port Washington,
New York
Steve Terrell, Lizton, Indiana
Jeff Vail, Hopkins, Michigan
We appreciate the assistance of Scouts
Jason Deveau, Will Hunt, and Mason Nix
and Assistant Scoutmaster Mark Deveau
of the Atlanta Area Council. We are grateful to the Virginia Rowing Company for
providing equipment for much of the
photography seen on these pages.
Two earlier editions of the Rowing
merit badge pamphlet, much of which
have been retained in this edition, were
written by K. Gregory Tucker, Readyville,
Tennessee, and Daniel G. McGuire,
Memphis, Tennessee, with assistance from
Bill Hall, Marietta, Georgia; Walter Person,
Memphis, Tennessee; the Saint Andrew
Rowing Club, Atlanta, Georgia; and Gary
Piantedosi, West Acton, Massachusetts.
The writers also thank Scouter James
Dalton, Acworth, Georgia, who first
6    ROWING

helped hone their rowing skills at the BSA
National Camping School in 1965.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serving
on the National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
The BSA thanks USRowing for its
ongoing support of the Rowing
merit badge. USRowing serves as
the national governing body for the
sport of rowing in the United States,
as recognized by the U.S. Olympic
Committee. Visit the USRowing
website at www.usrowing.org.

