MAMMAL
STUDY
STEM-Based


MAMMAL STUDY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


RequirementsScouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Mammal-Study or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35916
ISBN 978-0-8395-3271-7
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing


MAMMAL STUDY 3


Impala


MAMMAL STUDY 5
Contents
What Is a Mammal? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Classifying Mammals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Where Mammals Live . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Study Skins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Photographing Mammals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Making a Tracking Pit . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
The Food Chains of Mammals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Reporting on Mammals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Managing Mammals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Resources for Mammal Study. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
American bison


Humpback whale


MAMMAL STUDY 7
.What Is a Mammal?
What Is a Mammal?
When you hear the word “animal,” chances are that you think
of a dog, a cat, a bear, or a squirrel. And you’re right, of course.
Sometimes, though, the word “animal” is used in its scien-
tific meaning. To a scientist, the word covers a much broader
field. It includes insects, birds, fish, amphibians, reptiles, shell-
fish, worms, and many other living things. In fact, it includes
everything that can move on its own power and a few creatures
that can’t. The sponge, for example, spends its whole adult life
attached to the bottom of the ocean, but it is an animal.
We call a sponge an animal because, unlike plants, it does
not manufacture its own food. Plants make food from water
and carbon dioxide. Animals cannot do this.
But when we get down to the simplest living organisms,
even scientists can’t always agree on whether
they are plants or animals. We can say that:
• Most animals move on their own;
plants cannot.
• All green plants make their food;
animals cannot.
• Most plants have cellulose cell walls;
animals do not.
Anybody can see that although fish, frogs, snakes,
birds, and mammals all have backbones, they are
pretty distant cousins. They do not look much alike,
they do not act alike, but many of them share the
same habitat.
Cottontail rabbit


8 MAMMAL STUDY
What Is a Mammal?.
All vertebrates have some kind of backbone; invertebrates do
not. Vertebrates like the shark and ray have a cartilaginous
backbone with a central rod called the notochord. In the higher
vertebrates, the backbone is made up of segmented bones
called vertebrae. These vertebrates include fishes, amphibians,
reptiles, birds, and mammals.
So how does a scientist decide what a mammal is? The
first question a scientist asks is: Does the animal nurse its
young? If it does, it is a mammal. No other animal can produce
milk for its young.
A shark's backbone is made up of cartilage; sharks are vertebrate animals that lack
true bones found in other fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals.


MAMMAL STUDY 9
.What Is a Mammal?
Cheetahs
Another question is: Does it have hair? If it does, it is a
mammal. Some insects have growths that look like hair, but
only mammals have true hair. Some mammals have very
little. Rhinoceroses, hippopotamuses, elephants, and whales
are in this category. But if it does have real hair, it has to be
a mammal.


10 MAMMAL STUDY
What Is a Mammal?.
Another important difference between mammals and
other animals is the brain. If you could give an IQ test to
every species of animal, all mammals would score in the
high range and all other animals would score low (with the
exception of birds). There would be big variations among
the mammals, of course. Humans would be at the head of
the class, while the platypus and opossum would be far, far
in the rear. Their brain development has made mammals the
dominant kind of animal in the world. They are not the most
numerous; in fact, mammals make up less than one-half of
1 percent of all species of animals.
Mammals have certain bodily structures that other animals
do not have. They have fewer bones in the skull than other
vertebrates. They are the only vertebrates with a single bone
(dentary) on each side of the lower jaw. The dentary bones are
the only ones in which the teeth of the mammal are anchored.
In addition, mammals are the only vertebrates with three bones
or ossicles that transmit sound waves from the ear drum to the
inner ear sensory cells. Their teeth are different (heterodont)
and usually rather specialized. They have a diaphragm that
separates the chest from the abdomen. And nearly all mammals
have seven vertebrae in the neck.
A mammal may weigh as little as 1/12 ounce, as do
some shrews, or as much as 150 tons, like the blue whale.
It may spring, waddle, swim, or even fly. But if it has milk
for its young, has hair of some kind—even quills like the
porcupine—has a more complex brain, and has warm blood,
then it is a mammal.
Mammals are warm-blooded. This is important
because it means that mammals have a stable blood
temperature even when it is cold or hot outside,
so they can adapt to all kinds of climate. Birds are
warm-blooded, too, but reptiles, amphibians, and
fish are not.


Arachnids
Myriapods
Cephalopods
Bivalves
Gastropods
Protozoa
Insects
Arthropoda
Invertebrates Invertebrates
Crustaceans
Annelida
Nemathelminths
Platyhelminths Ctenophora
Vertebrates
Chordata
Mammals
Amphibians
Lower
chordates
Birds Reptiles
Fishes
Echinodermata
Porifera
Coelenterata
Mollusca
Ancestral Protozoa—The Animal Kingdom
“Tree of Life”


African elephant with young


MAMMAL STUDY 13
.Classifying Mammals
Classifying Mammals
A million or more different kinds of animals are now alive. The
scientist needs to have an orderly way to identify animals by
name. The system of classification was developed to separate
animals by their differences and groups them according to the
ways they are alike.
Scientists have grouped mammals into three
categories:
Marsupials, like the kangaroo (right) and the
opossum, give birth to young that are only
partially developed. Young in many species
typically are protected by a pouch (marsupium),
while others cling to the mother’s fur. When the
young are born, they find their way to the mother’s
nipples, which may be protected by a marsupium.
The young stay there for several weeks or months,
nourished by their mother’s milk.
Monotremes are mammals that lay eggs. Five species exist—
the duck-billed platypus (right) and four types of echidnas—and they all
can be found only in Australia and New Guinea. These mammals share
some reptilian characteristics but are not closely related to reptiles.
Placentals are mammals that bear live young. The word “placental”
comes from a similar word, “placenta,” which is the organ that grows
inside the mother to nourish the young as it develops
before birth. Examples include almost any mammal you
can think of, including rabbits (left), lemurs, bats, aardvarks,
horses, whales, pigs, and humans. Marsupials also possess
a placenta, but their placentas are relatively primitive,
and the young are born only partially developed. Full-term
development occurs outside the uterus.


14 MAMMAL STUDY
Classifying Mammals.
Six steps are used in this classification, with each step narrowing
down the range of differences and increasing the similarities between
animals. (There may be some substeps, too, but we won’t go into
them.) The final two steps—the genus and the species—give the
animal its scientific name.
The six steps are:
Phylum (plural, phyla)
This very broad, basic division comprises animals with one or more
characteristics in common. Although all zoologists use the same
system of classifying animals, they do not always agree on how the
classification should be done. And so the animal kingdom may be
divided into 20 or more phyla: Many of the phyla are made up of very
small, simple organisms that we do not usually think of as animals at
all, such as microscopic animals, insects, and worms. All animals with
backbones belong to the phylum Chordata.
Class
Each phylum is divided into classes. Chordata, for example, includes
Classes Pisces (fish), Amphibia (amphibians), Reptilia (reptiles),
Aves (birds), and Mammalia (mammals). Mammals are in a separate
class because they are the only animals that produce milk for their
young and have true hair.
Order
Next, each class is divided into orders. In Class Mammalia, 30 orders
are commonly recognized. Of these, the following are native to the
United States:
They are the Orders Eulipotyphla, Chiroptera, Cingulata (formerly
Edentata), Lagomorpha, Rodentia, Cetacea, Carnivora,
Sirenia, Perissodactyla, and Artiodactyla.
Each order has distinguishing characteristics.
Rodentia, for example, is made up entirely
of gnawing mammals, and Perissodactyla of
mammals with either one or three toes on
each hoof. The Order Primates includes you.
It also includes apes, monkeys, marmosets,
and several other small mammals, none of
them native to the United States. The monkey is a member
of the Order Primates.


MAMMAL STUDY 15
.Classifying Mammals
Family
Each order is next divided into families made up of mammals with
even greater similarities. For example, the Order Carnivora, which is
made up of flesh-eaters, includes both dogs and cats. Obviously cats
and dogs are different in many ways. So the cats are placed in the
Family Felidae, while the dogs are in Family Canidae.
The number of families in each order varies. The largest order,
Rodentia, has 35 families. The aardvark, a strange-looking African ant-
eater, is the only species in the only family of Order Tubulidentata.
Genus (plural, genera)
Now that we have separated the cats from the dogs, we are getting
near the end of our classification. Members of the same genus are very
similar to each other. Within our
Family Canidae, for example, we
find the wolves, foxes, coyotes,
and dogs. But there are plenty of
differences among them, too, so
they are separated into genera.
The coyote and the wolf are fairly
close cousins, so they are included
in the Genus Canis within the
Family Canidae.
Species
Lastly, the sixth classification further divides animals into species.
Here is where an animal gets its full scientific name, which includes
its genus and species. Thus the coyote becomes Canis latrans and the
timber wolf becomes Canis lupus.
There often is a seventh step in classification when there are
two or more members of the same species that may vary slightly in
appearance or geographic distribution. They are given a third title, the
subspecies. But members of a subspecies can interbreed with those of
the species, so they actually are considered to be the same. You know
that all kinds of dogs—from terriers to Dalmatians—can interbreed.
Therefore, they are all of the same species, even though they might
not look alike.
The leopard is a member of the
Family Felidae.


16 MAMMAL STUDY
Classifying Mammals.
Classifying Mammals You See
While it may sound confusing, the classification procedure
will become more easy with practice. When you begin study-
ing mammals, you will need a field guide to help you with
the Latin names for genera and species.
Suppose you see a squirrel in the park and decide to
classify it. You can quickly take the first two steps because
you already know that it is a mammal. Therefore, it must
be in the Phylum Chordata and the Class Mammalia. If you
could examine its teeth (but do not try to do that), you would
find that as a rodent it has only two incisors (gnawing teeth)
above and two below.
Most rodents have four toes on each front foot and five
toes on each hind foot. If the squirrel has these, it is a member
of the Order Rodentia. Consulting your field guide will lead
you to discover that it belongs to the Family Sciuridae, which
includes squirrels as well as woodchucks, chipmunks, and
prairie dogs.
Kingdom: Animal
Phylum: Chordata
Class: Mammalia
Order: Carnivora
Family: Canidae
Genus: Canis
Species: lupus
Subspecies: lupus familiaris
It’s Not
Just a Dog


MAMMAL STUDY 17
.Classifying Mammals
As the squirrel scampers up a tree, you note that it is a
pretty good size and that its color is mixed gray and a yellow-
ish brown. The tail is big and bushy and tipped with white. Its
underbelly is whitish.
If you live east of the Mississippi River, you can be pretty
sure that what you see is an Eastern gray squirrel. Its scientific
name is Sciurus carolinensis. If you live in the West and see
a squirrel that is a little grayer, it is a Western gray squirrel
(Sciurus griseus). Note that while the genus (Sciurus) is the
same for both, the species is not.
Take your field guide into a large park or
woods and try your skill. Observe any
mammals you see as closely as possible.
Find out, if you can, what it eats. Estimate its
size. Note its color. Remember what its body
looked like, particularly the head. Does it stay
on the ground? Does it burrow? The answers
to these questions will help you classify the
animal exactly. Of course, you will need a
guide to the scientific names, but with it
you should have no trouble classifying the
common mammals in your area.
Rock squirrel


Polar bear


MAMMAL STUDY 19
.Where Mammals Live
Where Mammals Live
If you want to spot a black bear, you would not go looking
for it in the desert. And if you hope to see tree squirrels, you
would not begin your search on the treeless Great Plains. You
know that you have to go where these animals live.
Every animal needs a food supply, shelter, water, and liv-
ing space. It makes its home where these needs are met. Such
an area is called the habitat. A beaver, for example, needs a
watercourse in order to carry out its life functions. It needs a
supply of deciduous trees, preferably aspens, cottonwoods, or
willows, that can be used for food. And so if you want to look
for beaver, you must look along streams bordered with hard-
wood trees. You will not find a beaver very far from water.
On the other hand, the kangaroo rat, which lives in
deserts in the West, may never
come within miles of a watercourse.
And it may never drink water. It gets
its water supply directly from the
food it eats.
The digestion of food results
in the production of what is known
as metabolic water. All animals
produce metabolic water from the
protein, fats, and sugars they digest.
The kangaroo rat has biological
adaptations that allow for smaller
losses of body water in its urine,
feces, and exhaled air. Thus the
digestion of food results in a
net gain of water that reduces
or removes the need to drink.
But like any other animal, it needs
shelter, and the kangaroo rat finds
it by burrowing underground. Animal needs for life
FOOD
LIVING SPACE
COVER
WATER


20 MAMMAL STUDY
Where Mammals Live.
Mammals can be found in every natural
habitat—grasslands, forests, woodland border areas,
sea coasts, swamps and marshes, rivers and lakes,
oceans, mountains, and deserts. Even where humans
have changed the face of nature, mammals are
likely to thrive—in city parks, streets, backyards,
cemeteries, even barren playgrounds.
But in nature, mammals will be found in one
or more of the conventional habitats. Many, like the
red fox, can adapt themselves to several habitats
where their needs can be met. You may find this
fox in a brushy area near a marsh, in woodlands,
on mountains, or even in your backyard if you live
in a suburb. A meat-eating animal (of the Order
Carnivora, remember?) may travel over several
habitats in search of dinner.
The following pages describe the major
habitats of mammals in the United States and the
mammals you are most likely to see in each.
Fields and Prairies
With everything from lush green mountain valleys to hot, barren
deserts, fields and prairies can be home to many mammals.
The number of trees dotting fields and prairies is small in
comparison to woodland areas, so the mammals who live in
these areas will not be dependent on the shelter or bounty
that a tree can provide. Field and prairie mammals may live
underground, and sometimes their water supply is scarce. Some
of the resident mammals, like the elk and deer, feed mainly on
grasses and other plants, and some predatory mammals, like
wolves, may feed off of other animals.
Red fox
White-tailed deer
Wolf
Elk


MAMMAL STUDY 21
.Where Mammals Live
Eastern Woodlands
This geographic term is commonly
used to describe the eastern half of
the United States. Just as its name
implies, the area typically is greatly
populated with trees, wildflowers, and
shrubs that can be used resourcefully
by the mammals that live there.
The four seasons in this climate are
moderate, so the animals need not
be extremely adaptive. Some of the
mammals you will find in this region
include black bears and bobcats.
Vole
Bobcat
Weasel
Black bear
Raccoon
Cottontail rabbit


22 MAMMAL STUDY
Where Mammals Live.
Streams, Lakes, and Marshes
Wetlands provide prime real estate for mammals like
moose and beavers, who get their food supply from
the products of the nutrient-rich waters. The mammals
here can be dependent on other forms of life that thrive
in wet areas, like the bat, which feeds off the many
mosquitoes, flies, and beetles that make their homes
near water.
Mink Woodchuck
Skunk
Manatees live in estuaries, rivers, and shallow waters off many coasts.
In the United States they mainly are found off the coast of Florida.
Manatees are not related to sea lions or dolphins but are more closely
related to elephants. These curious and friendly creatures can weigh well
over a ton, and can grow from 8 to 15 feet long. Manatees continuously
grow molars, which is
good because the sand
on the plants they eat
tends to wear down their
teeth.
Manatees have been
hunted extensively and
are now mainly in danger
from water pollution,
boat propellers, and loss
of habitat.


MAMMAL STUDY 23
.Where Mammals Live
Western Pine Forest
The mammals that inhabit the pine forest regions of the western
United States are much the same as those of the eastern wood-
lands. The forest areas receive adequate rainfall to provide all
animals with needed nourishment, and the vegetation tends to
be lush and green.
Sighting Mammals
No doubt you have seen wild mammals in nature, even if you
live in the heart of a large city. Squirrels abound in most parks,
and you may also see cottontail rabbits and perhaps field or
other mice in the park.
But you know that mam-
mals do not rush out to greet
you in the wild. Most of them
are very shy. And a large
percentage of mammals are
nocturnal—that is, they stay in
their dens or burrows during
the day and venture out for
food at night.
For these reasons, spotting
mammals is not easy. The
biggest population of wildlife
is likely to be found in what
ecologists call an “edge”
habitat, that is, on the border
between a field and a wooded
area or the border between
woods and swamp.
Squirrel
Porcupine


24 MAMMAL STUDY
Where Mammals Live.
Naturally, the
less noise you
make the more
likely you are to
spot animals.
Tips for Spotting Mammals
Here are some of the ways you can increase your
chances of seeing mammals in their natural habitat.
Blend Into the Landscape. Find a comfortable spot to
sit or lie prone. Stay absolutely still and be patient.
Some mammals will lose their fear of you after a time
and venture out of hiding. If you want to make your
presence even less obvious, build a blind one day and
go into it a day or two later when the animals have
gotten used to it. Take binoculars if you have them.
Go Out at Night. With your parent or guardian or
another Scout, visit a natural habitat at night. Take a
flashlight. Shine the light at intervals on the trail ahead,
into treetops, and into dense brush. Skunks, foxes,
deer, flying squirrels, raccoons, and opossums may be
looking at you.
Take to the Water. Look along a stream bank or
lakeshore for tracks in the mud and sand. That night,
go out in a boat with a flashlight and row to a point
offshore from where you saw the tracks. Sit quietly,
and at the slightest sound, aim your light toward it.
Or anchor near a beaver dam or muskrat house and
shine your light whenever you hear a sound.
Stake Out a Burrow. If you spot a hole in the ground
while on a hike, poke some pencil-sized sticks lightly
into the ground around it. If the hole is a mammal’s
burrow, you will find the sticks knocked down when
you come back to look at it later. So sit down in a
comfortable spot nearby and wait. If you are patient,
you may be rewarded by a look at a woodchuck,
badger, ground squirrel, pocket gopher, or chipmunk.
Make a Tracking Pit. A tracking pit is a baited area
designed to attract animals to food so that you can
get their tracks. If you sit quietly some distance from a
tracking pit at night and shine a flashlight occasionally at
the pit, you may spot mammals enjoying the free lunch.


MAMMAL STUDY 25
.Where Mammals Live
Reading Mammal Signs
Regardless of whether you have good luck at spotting mam-
mals, you should learn to recognize the signs, or evidence, of
mammals. The most common signs are tracks, but you can
also find droppings and signs of feeding, scratchings, gnawings,
rubbings, and game trails. You can also find animal homes—
nests, burrows, and dens.
When you learn how to look for them, you should have
no trouble in turning up mammal signs on any hike.
Tracks
Animal tracks are quite easy to
find in any habitat where there is
some soft material, such as snow,
mud, soft earth, or dust. As a rule,
the best places to look are stream
banks, puddles, and lakeshores.
Many times you will find a
track that does not look like anything
in your field guide because it is
not all there. Perhaps the ground is
irregular, and so claws or other features do not appear in the
track. The same animal’s track may look different in the snow
and in dust. The “perfect track” may not appear very often.
In addition, you must remember that not every track you see
was made by a mammal. Reptiles, birds, and amphibians make
tracks, too.
Marmots are hefty members of the squirrel family—they can weigh as
much as 16 pounds. Marmots feed on vegetation all summer to prepare
for their hibernation. In winter, the marmot climbs down into the burrow
it has dug with its powerful claws, and closes up the entrance, packing
it tightly with soil and plants. When hibernating, marmots reduce their
heart rate, body temperature, and use of oxygen, and they live off
their body fat. Most marmots hibernate for about seven months, but in
Alaska they are known to stay underground for as long as nine months.
During the summer, some marmots choose a more open space to
live, such as between rocks at the bottom of a mountain slope.
Marmot burrows can be hundreds of feet long, and have openings
for escaping and scouting. Snakes, raccoons, foxes, and other animals
use abandoned marmot burrows as their new homes.


26 MAMMAL STUDY
Where Mammals Live.
RABBIT
SKUNK
COUGAR
Generally, the front foot and the hind foot of the same mammal make
different tracks. The size, shape, and number of toes are likely to be dif-
ferent. Like anything else, skill in reading tracks comes only with practice.
FRONT
HOUSE CAT
FRONT
11/8" X 11/8"
HIND
HIND
DOG
FRONT
HIND
SQUIRREL
FRONT
HIND
FRONT
FRONT
HIND
CHIPMUNK
FRONT
HIND HIND
PORCUPINE
FRONT
HIND
RACCOON
FRONT
HIND
3"
33/4"
LYNX
81/2"
7"
OTTER
FRONT
HIND
31/4"
FOX
FRONT
HIND
21/4" X 21/8"
21/8" X 17/8"
COYOTE
HIND
FRONT
21/4" X 13/4"
21/2" X 2"
WOLF
FRONT
HIND
41/4" X 3"
21/8" X 33/4"
MINK
FRONT
HIND
11/2"
13/4"
WEASEL
FRONT
HIND
13/4" 11/2"


MAMMAL STUDY 27
.Where Mammals Live
As an aid in learning how to read tracks, you may want to preserve a
few that you find in the wild. This can be done by plaster casting.
To make a plaster cast of a track you find on the trail, you will
need a cardboard strip and some plaster of paris. Notch the edges of
the cardboard and bend it to form a collar. Place the collar around the
track you want to preserve. Mix the plaster of paris, pour it into the
collar, and wait for it to harden. In warm weather, the cast will harden
in about 20 minutes. When it is completely dry, remove the cast and
brush off the dirt. On the back of the cast, write the date and location.
When you have identified the animal that made the track, write its
name as well.
Casting a mold is a way to bring home a
souvenir of a track you found.


28 MAMMAL STUDY
Where Mammals Live.
When you have learned to identify common mammal
tracks, you can “read” interesting animal stories. You may see
where a raccoon lunched on mussels and left the shells along
the lakeshore.
As soon as you can identify a few tracks, try a little
detective work. With practice, you will be able to learn a
number of things about the animal just from its tracks. For
example, how far apart are the tracks? The answer tells you
two things—the size of the mammal and whether it was
walking, running, or something in between. The depth of the
track and whether it is deeper in front than in back helps to
tell whether it was traveling slowly or swiftly.
Droppings
Animal droppings may also be found. It usually takes a little
practice to identify droppings for sure, unless tracks at the
site can be definitely identified. Often droppings can tell a
story just as well as tracks—for instance, if you find mouse
hairs in the “scat” of a fox. You will find drawings of the
droppings of mammals in A Field Guide to Animal Tracks.
Feeding Signs
Sometimes the signs of feeding will tell you what mammals
are in the area. They take many forms. Gnawed bark of a
tree, nipped twigs and small branches, shells of acorns or
other nuts, bits of fur or feathers, skeletons or carcasses,
closely clipped grass, holes in the ground—all these may be
signs of feeding.
Signs that plant-eating animals like deer and rabbits are
around usually are easy to find. Rabbits will browse on low-
growing shrubs, nipping off the ends of new shoots.
They also will eat the bark on young saplings. Deer,
too, browse on the tender buds and twigs of trees and
shrubs. In harsh winters the snow level will cause their
browse line to be higher as they reach for food.
Muskrats eat the tender parts of some water
plants, discarding the tougher parts, which float to
the surface of a lake or pond.
Porcupines like tree bark, and often you may see
the top of a pine stripped of bark all the way around.
Sometimes a hole in the ground will tell you that
a skunk or fox found a mouse nest and dug it out
for supper.
Gnawing work of a beaver


MAMMAL STUDY 29
.Where Mammals Live
Dens, Nests, and Burrows
Mammals have a wide variety of homes—or no home at all.
Many of the hoofed animals, such as the deer, have no per-
manent shelter. The white-tailed deer, for example, wanders
around its home range of about one to two square miles.
But most mammals do have some kind of a home—in
the earth, in a shallow nest on the surface, in a cave, in a
rock crevice, or in a hollow tree.
Some mammal homes are easy to spot and identify. You
can’t miss a beaver lodge or a muskrat house because of their
distinctive construction.
Burrows are harder to identify because many mammals
are burrowers. Generally the size, location, and shape will
give you a clue. Woodchuck burrows are often found in open
fields and, if you look carefully, you will find two holes, one
with a mound of dirt nearby and the other without a mound.
Beavers cut down
entire trees near
their water dens,
then cut them into
shorter lengths
and store the
branches on the
stream bottom.
During the winter
their food supply
must be close
at hand.
Prairie dogs


30 MAMMAL STUDY
Where Mammals Live.
A red fox burrow resembles a woodchuck’s but the tunnel
is bigger and the location is less likely to be near buildings or
roads used by people. But if it is in an appealing place, a fox
may take over and enlarge a woodchuck’s burrow. Skunks or
rabbits may also live in abandoned woodchuck burrows.
Bears use caves, hollow logs, undercut banks, and uproot-
ed trees for their dens. In the high-mountain country of the
western United States, cougars use caves or rock crevices for
shelter. Many bats are most at home in caves.
Prairie dog burrows look like miniature volcano craters.
The mound around the entrance is used as a look-
out post and also keeps surface water from running
down the hole. Coyotes, ground squirrels, chipmunks,
some mice, gophers, and moles also make their
homes underground.
Another mammal that gives clear evidence of its
presence is the woodrat. This tiny rodent is the king
of thieves among mammals, and its big nest of leaves,
twigs, and debris may look like a junkyard. The wood-
rat brings home everything it finds and is especially
fond of bright things like mirrors and bits of metal.
Woodrat


MAMMAL STUDY 31
.Where Mammals Live
Game Trails
Game trails are like wildlife highways. Animals may share a
single pathway through the woods, across a meadow, or up a
hillside, and use that trail for many years. Look for evidence
of animal tracks, droppings, and hair on any well-used path-
way through the brush. Find a secluded spot a little bit off the
trail to observe the mammals that pass through. Be careful
not to get too close to the trail so as not to spook the animals
that use it.
Other Signs
Evidence of mammals also may be found in signs of rubbings,
gnawing, and scratching. Buck deer, for example, rub the “vel-
vet” from their newly grown antlers in the spring by scraping
the antlers against a sapling. Look for scarred or smoothed
bark on young trees.
Bears will tear off the outer bark of evergreen trees to eat
the inner bark, and you may find the vertical rips made by a
bear’s teeth. You also may find their claw marks and hairs on
trees they have climbed.
In the Western states, high in the mountains, you might
come upon a small haystack near a fallen tree or a rock. It is
the winter food supply of the pika, which looks like a small
guinea pig but belongs in the same order as rabbits and hares.
The haystack is made up of various plants that
the animal gathers in mountain meadows.
Many other animals leave distinctive signs of their
presence. One we have not mentioned so far is the most
distinctive of all. Here is a hint—it is an odor. Give up? The
skunk, of course.
Studying Habitats
Requirement 3 has three options. Requirements 3(a) and 3(b)
are quite similar, the major difference being that for 3(a) you
must study two habitats. For 3(b) the 25-acre area may cover
only one habitat or several. (The third option, 3(c), is on the
life history of a mammal.)
If you choose to do 3(a) or 3(b), your choice may be
decided by the kinds of natural habitats you can go to easily. In
the city, for example, there might be a large park nearby that, if
it has no stream or pond, might have only one animal habitat.
That would be a good site for requirement 3(b), but not for 3(a).


32 MAMMAL STUDY
Where Mammals Live.
On the other hand, the two or more habitats needed to
complete requirement 3(a) may cover small areas. A short
stretch of country roadside might be one habitat and an acre or
two of marsh might be another.
It makes sense that the larger the area of habitat you
cover, the more mammals you are likely to see. However, that
is not necessarily true.
The number of various mammals that an area of land or
water will support with food, water, shelter, and living space is
called the carrying capacity. It is like a water bucket. You can
fill it only to its capacity; after that limit is reached, the bucket
overflows. So does the land.
Biologists have found that releasing cottontails in a habitat
is not likely to raise the rabbit population for long. The reason
is that it is very likely that nature has already given that
particular habitat all the rabbits that can possibly find food and
shelter there. And so, when well-meaning persons put in more
rabbits, the rabbits become an “overflow.” The land simply
will not support them. The result is that the excess rabbits
must either leave or die. This often happens when the seasons
change. For example, the population of a woodland area will
fluctuate as summer changes to winter, when the food supply
is much less available.
Snowshoe hare


MAMMAL STUDY 33
.Where Mammals Live
Overflow
This is called carrying capacity. A 2-gallon container holds only
2 gallons.
Likewise, a given area of land
supports only the number of
animals whose needs for food,
water, cover, and living space
are supplied.
Thus, surplus fish and wildlife from
breeding populations or stocking
disperse and settle new areas that
have not reached the carrying capacity,
or die from various causes if new
open dispersal areas are not available.





MAMMAL STUDY 35
.Study Skins
However, do not
trap and use
deer mice or
white-footed mice
to prepare for
the study skin.
Avoid contact
with these rodents
and their urine
and droppings.
They may carry
hantavirus, which
could develop
into Hantavirus
Pulmonary
Syndrome, which
can be transferred
to humans and
could result in a
fatal lung disease.
Study Skins
Study skins are the natural skins of mammals or birds that are
preserved for scientific study. The purpose is to show the ani-
mal in a compact, easily stored form. Study skins are used by
scientists and researchers in museums.
Mounted specimens are similarly preserved, but they
are shown as closely as possible to the way they appeared in
nature. A wall-mounted deer’s head and base-mounted bird
are examples of mounted specimens. They are essentially
trophies and are not made for their scientific value other than
in museum habitat cases.
Getting Your Specimens
Before you start to prepare your study skin, make sure you
have rubber gloves and a mask that covers your nose and
mouth, such as a painter’s mask. The gloves will help prevent
contamination of your skin from organisms carried on the skin
and in the blood of the mammal. The mask is worn to help
you avoid breathing any disease particles that might be on the
animal’s fur or in its dander. Keep the gloves and mask on for
as long as you are handling the animal and until the work area
is properly cleaned.
The work area should be well-ventilated and large enough
that you are not cramped. Prepare the area by covering a table
with a large plastic trash bag, then a thick piece of cardboard,
then a thick layer of newspaper. When you are finished work-
ing, place all of the newspaper and cardboard into the plastic
bag for disposal and thoroughly clean the tabletop and floor
around your work area with a strong household cleaner.
If you plan to purchase a live mouse, discuss with
your counselor a proper and safe way to humanely
euthanize the mouse.


36 MAMMAL STUDY
Study Skins.
If for some reason mice cannot be obtained, check with
a local conservation office. A representative there may be
able to furnish a specimen that you can use. Remember that
laws govern the trapping and killing of certain mammals.
If you are in doubt about what mammals may be taken,
ask the conservation officer.
Skinning Your Specimen
To create a study skin, first weigh the specimen using a house-
hold scale. Using the metric system, record the four standard mea-
surements with a ruler: total length (from tip of nose to tip of tail,
not including the fur), tail length from the base of
tail to the tip (not including fur), hind foot length,
and ear length from base of ear to tip of ear.
Now you are ready to skin the animal:
Step 1—Place the animal on its back. Using
a sharp knife, make a cut from the base of the
neck to the vent at the animal’s rear. Cut just
deep enough to sever the skin.
Step 2—Using the thumbs and forefingers,
pull the skin away from the body all around
to the back. Loosen the skin as much as you
can around the thighs.
Step 3—To free the skin around the rear legs,
bend the animal’s knee sharply upward. You
should then be able to slip the skin over the
knee joint and work it free of the rest of the leg.
Cut the leg off at the “ankle” and leave the foot
in the skin.
As requirement 4(a) suggests, your best bet would be to
trap a mouse using a mousetrap. Their small size makes
them easy to prepare for study skins, and most are not pro-
tected by law. Once you have caught your mouse, remove
the dead mouse (while wearing rubber gloves and a face
mask) from the trap and begin your preparation.
1
2
3


MAMMAL STUDY 37
.Study Skins
Step 4—Using your fingers, strip the skin
off the tail.
Step 5—Carefully strip the skin down-
ward, as if pulling off a glove, until it is
stopped by the animal’s front legs. Free the
front legs by bending them as you did the
back legs. Cut the leg off at the “wrist” and
leave the paw in the skin.
Step 6—Again using your fingers, begin
peeling the skin over the skull. Use your
knife carefully around the ear opening,
cutting as close to the skull as you can to
free the skin. Continue using your knife
carefully in the area of the eyes, removing
the eyeballs but not the eyelids. Take care
around the nose to cut close to the bone.
Cut the lips at the gum line.
Step 7—Dispose of the carcass except the
skull. Sever that and keep it. It will be part
of the study skin specimen.
Preserving the Skin
To keep the skin from deteriorating and
being damaged by insects, it must be thor-
oughly cleaned and a preservative applied.
Proceed as follows:
Step 1—Using a scraper or knife,
carefully clean all bits of flesh, fat, and car-
tilage sticking to the inside of the skin. Take
particular care not to cut through thin skin
on ears, nose, and lips.
Step 2—If the fur side of the skin is dirty,
wash it with a weak solution of ammonia
in cold water.
Step 3—Use borax, a white, crystalline
salt that you can get at a supermarket, as a
preservative. Rub the borax thoroughly into
the inner side of the skin. Cover all parts.
4
5
6


38 MAMMAL STUDY
Study Skins.
Stuffing the Skin
For stuffing a small animal, a single
wire running from head to tail is
enough for support. The body and
head are then packed loosely with
cotton and the incision sewed up.
Proceed as follows:
Step 1—Cut a piece of wire about 2
inches longer than the animal’s length
from nose to the tip of the tail. Bend
the head end into a tight loop; insert
the wire into the skin, taking care not
to push it through the skin of the tail.
You might also want to put wire into
the legs of the animal, so they will stay
stiff when it dries. The wire in each
of the legs should be long enough to
extend into the cavity but not so long
that the wire in the front legs’ crosses
with the wire in the back legs.
Step 2—Loosely pack soft cotton bat-
ting into the legs and then fill the head
and body cavities.
Step 3—Use a needle and thread to
stitch up the incision. Close the skin’s
mouth and put a couple of stitches in it
to keep it closed.
Step 4—Use your fingers to shape
the body as naturally as you can. The
animals should be shown in a straight,
belly-down position. The legs should be
extended to front and back.
Step 5—Pin the skin to a board until
it is completely dry.
1
2
3
4
5


MAMMAL STUDY 39
.Study Skins
Preparing the Skull
A study skin should always have the animal’s skull with it. It
is a good idea to attach the skull so that there is no doubt it
belongs with the specimen. Prepare it as follows:
Step 1—The skull must be thoroughly cleaned of all head tis-
sue, including the skin, eyeballs, and tongue. Remove the brain
tissue by inserting a stick and slushing out the contents from
the skull. This will be easier if you put the skull in boiling
water for a few minutes and then scrape it.
Step 2—When the skull is completely clean, boil it again with
a little laundry detergent, then soak a short while in diluted
hydrogen peroxide.
Identifying Your Specimen
To have scientific value, every study skin must be tagged and
labeled. Identify the species and give its sex, the date you
caught it, its length, its weight if you know it, where you
caught it, and your name. Tie the tag with this information to
a rear foot.
While most museums and laboratories use dermestid
beetle larvae to clean bird carcasses and small skulls,
a more practical method for Scouts is by boiling.


Your local zoo will provide plenty of opportunities to photograph a wide variety of
mammals in a short period of time. A zoo makes a good alternative if you don’t live
near an area where mammals can easily and safely be observed in the wild.


MAMMAL STUDY 41
.Photographing Mammals
Photographing
Mammals
If you are a photography fan, you will have a lot of fun with
this requirement. But if you have never done any camera work
or only the simplest kind, it may be a challenge.
Wild animals will rarely come up and pose for a family
portrait, and very few will hold still for “just one more.” But
you do not need a lot of expensive equipment to take good
pictures of wild mammals.
You should, however, have a good basic camera—not
necessarily a fancy, expensive one, but one with a telephoto
lens or portrait attachment, synchronized flash, and a shutter
speed of at least 1/100th of a second. Without them you will
not be able to get clear, sharp wildlife pictures—unless you
have patience and good luck!
Few wild animals
will permit you to
get close enough
to take the kind
of snapshots
that you get of
your family.
Many of today’s larger zoos have exhibits based on the natural
habitats of animals. This makes it easier to observe animals in
a setting similar to what would be found in nature.


42 MAMMAL STUDY
Photographing Mammals.
Principles of Leave No Trace
The principles of Leave No Trace that are used in trekking and
camping also apply when observing wildlife in their habitats.
Pay attention to the environment as you observe, study, and
photograph mammals for the merit badge requirements.
PLAN AHEAD
AND PREPARE
Proper trip planning and
preparation helps hikers and
campers accomplish trip goals safely and
enjoyably while minimizing damage to
natural and cultural resources. Be sure to
check the weather report, know the terrain
you are planning to hike, and allow enough
time to reach your destination and return.
TRAVEL AND CAMP ON
DURABLE SURFACES
Damage to land occurs when
visitors trample vegetation or communities
of organisms beyond recovery. The resulting
barren areas develop into undesirable trails,
campsites, and soil erosion. Minimize
damage to wildlife’s habitat by using
existing trails and selecting designated
or existing campsites.
DISPOSE OF WASTE
PROPERLY (PACK IT IN,
PACK IT OUT)
This simple yet effective saying motivates
backcountry visitors to take their trash
home with them. It makes sense to carry
out of the backcountry the extra materials
taken there by your group or others. Accept
the challenge of packing out all trash,
leftover food, and litter.
LEAVE WHAT YOU FIND
Allow others a sense of
discovery, and preserve the past.
Leave rocks, plants, animals, archaeological
artifacts, and other objects as you find
them. Examine but do not touch cultural or
historical structures and artifacts.
MINIMIZE
CAMPFIRE IMPACTS
Some people would not
think of camping without a campfire.
Yet the naturalness of many areas has
been degraded by overuse of fires and
increasing demand for firewood.
RESPECT WILDLIFE
While observing wildlife, this
is perhaps the most important
Leave No Trace principle. Quick
movements and loud noises are stressful
to animals. Considerate campers and
hikers practice these safety methods:
• Observe wildlife from afar to avoid
disturbing them.
• Give animals a wide berth, especially
during breeding, nesting, and
birthing seasons.
• Store food securely and keep garbage
and food scraps away from animals so
they will not acquire bad habits. Never
feed wildlife. Help keep wildlife wild.
You are too close if an animal alters its
normal activities.
BE CONSIDERATE
OF OTHER VISITORS
Thoughtful campers respect
other visitors and protect the quality of
their experience by traveling in small
groups, keeping the noise down, and
respecting the privacy of others.


MAMMAL STUDY 43
.Photographing Mammals
Methods of Photographing Wild Mammals
Wildlife photographers use three methods—stalking,
concealment in a blind, and “trapping,” a method in
which the animal takes its own picture.
Safety
Nearly all animals will avoid people
if they can. Mammals, however, can be
dangerous, especially if a person gets
between an adult and its young. Always be careful
when observing wild animals. Never go out alone
if there is the possibility of encountering bears or
mountain lions.
Be patient! Hunting with a camera is a real sport, but
it is not a sport for the person who does not have the
patience for stalking and waiting.


44 MAMMAL STUDY
Photographing Mammals.
Stalking
As a Scout you have learned something about stalking.
If you are skillful at it, this method will sometimes get
you close enough to large mammals like deer and elk to
take their picture. If you have a telephoto lens, you should
be able to get a satisfactory shot at 100 to 150 feet.
Here are some stalking tips:
• Have all adjustments made on your camera—the light
reading, exposure time, and the distance you hope to be
from the animal when you shoot.
• Many mammals have rather poor vision but keen hearing
and sense of smell. Each time it looks up, “freeze”—and
stay frozen until it looks away. Avoid all sudden movements
and unnecessary sounds.
• Shoot when you have reached the distance you have previ-
ously calculated as the right one. Another five steps, and you
may be watching the south end of a northbound animal.
Concealment
Anything that you can use to conceal yourself can be used
as a blind. A tent, a hollow tree, or a cave may serve well.
All you need is something that will keep you from being seen
and leave a hole for you to look out and for your camera lens.
The site for a blind might be a regular mammal feeding
station or water hole. Set up your blind downwind from the
spot where you expect the animals to come. If possible, place
If you plan to use
flash, you had
better set up the
reflectors a day
or two ahead of
time to let the
animals get
accustomed to
them and lose
their fear of these
shiny objects.


MAMMAL STUDY 45
.Photographing Mammals
it where the sun will be behind your camera. Camouflage the
blind with branches, grasses, and reeds to make it look as much
a part of the landscape as possible.
Place your camera on a tripod, ready for action, and then
relax. Make as little noise as possible. Be patient. You may
have to wait in your blind for hours or even days before you
get the picture you want.
Trapping
In this method the animal trips the camera’s shutter and takes
its own picture. You do not even have to be around. It has
advantages, but it has disadvantages, too. For one thing, you
can only take one picture a day (or night). For another, you
may not get a pose you like.
To make your “trap,” you need a sturdy tripod, a 4-inch
strap hinge, rubber bands, a 12- to 18-inch cable release to fit
your camera, and tenpenny finishing nails cut to 1 inch long
and filed round on both ends.
You will need to fasten the hinge to the tripod with rubber
bands so that it opens and closes easily. Place the cable release
through a screw hole in the hinge so that the closing hinge
will press the release and operate the shutter. Then loop three
or four strong rubber bands around the hinge to hold it closed.
Open the hinge and hold it open with the 1-inch nail.
When you pull the string or wire, the nail comes out of the
hinge. The hinge closes and presses the cable release, which
trips the shutter.
Setting up your “trap” close to home will give you easy access
to reset it as needed.


46 MAMMAL STUDY
Photographing Mammals.
The next step is to make the mousetrap trigger that will
pull the string to take the picture.
To set up your camera, drive a stake into the ground
under the tripod and fasten the trap to it so that the snapper
snaps downward when the trigger is released. Set the trap and
run a piece of string or fine wire from the snapper to the nail
in the hinge, pulling it as tight as possible. When the snapper
snaps, it pulls out the nail. The hinge closes and presses the
cable release, which trips the shutter and takes the picture.
Suppose we want a woodchuck coming out of a hole.
We’ll drive a small stake into the ground on one side of the
hole and tie a piece of thread to it. We’ll drive a stake into the
ground on the other side and screw in it a small screw eye
about 2 inches above the ground. We’ll run the thread from
stake No. 1 through the eye in stake No. 2 and tie it to the
trigger on the mousetrap. When the woodchuck comes out
to eat, he hits the strings above to his burrow and takes his
own picture.
Try your backyard. Any mammal that will come to a feeder
can be photographed.
To make the feeder, drill a 1/4-inch hole in a board tray or
a half log, top to bottom. Drive a stake beside the tray or log.
Set the tripod and camera with the mousetrap fastened
to the stake underneath. Set the trap and fasten the string to
the snapper and to the nail in the hinge. Tie a piece of thread
to your bait. Set the bait on the feeder over the hole. Run the
thread through the hole and tie it to the trigger on the trap.
Now, when a mouse or other small mammal picks up the bait,
it triggers its own picture.


MAMMAL STUDY 47
.Photographing Mammals
Another method that you can use to photo-trap a mammal
in the field is to use a trail camera. The camera operates using
a built-in sensor that detects heat and movement. When the
camera senses activity, it automatically “wakes up” and
records a digital image of whatever is standing in front of the
lens to a flash memory card. The cards are inexpensive to buy
and can be used over and over again. The images can then be
downloaded to your home computer for viewing.
There are many game camera manufacturers today that
offer user-friendly cameras of varying quality and price ranges,
from as low as $60. A game camera will be the most successful
at capturing images of wildlife when placed at an appropriate
location. This could be a feeding station, fence, or creek
crossing, along a beaten trail, or adjacent to an active scrape
or rub.
Moose





MAMMAL STUDY 49
.Making a Tracking Pit
Making a Tracking Pit
A tracking pit is a small area of ground prepared so that animal
tracks will show up well. It is baited to attract animals to it.
Ernest Thompson Seton, one of the founders of the Boy Scouts
of America (now Scouting America), may have invented the
tracking pit; regardless, he described it more than 60 years ago.
Making a tracking pit is an especially good project for
Scout camp because you can set up your tracking pit some
evening near your campsite. Then, without bothering anybody
in camp or having them bother you, you can get up early in
the morning and check your tracking pit. It is a good idea to
put the pit in an out-of-the-way place even though you are
checking it early.
To make a pit, loosen the soil in a 4-by-8-foot area of bare
ground. Make it soft enough so that you sink in an inch or two
when you walk on it.
For the bait container, use a coffee can. Punch a few
holes about an inch from the top. Put scraps of meat or
fish inside and put the plastic lid on. Now bury the can in the
center of the tracking pit to about 2 inches from its top. Then
rake the tracking pit smooth, so that the animal that visits it
will leave tracks.
In the morning, visit the
pit, and no doubt you
will find several
animal tracks,
including
probably
some left by
birds. Use a
field guide to
tracks to identify them.
Oftentimes at
Scout camp,
there will be
special hikes
organized early
in the morning,
and, unless you
put your pit in an
out-of-the-way
place, it may be
inadvertently
trampled. So
look carefully
before selecting
your site. Find
barren ground
for your tracking
pit—don’t clear
the area.
STRING
8 FEET
4 FEET
BAIT IN BURIED CAN
SMOOTH, DAMP EARTH
Tracking pit


Herbivore (cottontail rabbit)
Carnivore (badger)
Insectivore (shrew)
Omnivore (bear)


MAMMAL STUDY 51
.The Food Chains of Mammals
The Food Chains
of Mammals
When they are talking about mammals’ eating habits, scientists
divide the mammals into four major groups:
All mammals depend on plants for life. The way the largest
mammal is linked to the soil through other small animals is
called a food chain. The chain starts in the soil. There plants
begin to sprout, drawing on the energy of the sun to combine
carbon dioxide, water, and minerals from the soil to make
their own food. And the plants become food for many kinds
of animals, from the tiniest insect to the large deer.
Among the plants growing here is succulent clover, a
favorite of some insects and mammals. The clover blossoms
are visited by a butterfly, and as it lands it suddenly is seized
by a shrew, the smallest mammal in America and one of the
hungriest. The shrew makes short work of the butterfly and
goes on the prowl again for something to satisfy its huge
appetite. But the shrew is careless, and suddenly it is pounced
upon by a weasel, which quickly kills the tiny predator.
This is an example of a food chain: from soil to plant
to insect to small mammal to larger mammal and back to
soil with the death of the weasel, whose remains decay and
nutrients return to the soil to be utilized by plants.
• Herbivorous mammals eat only plants. Examples: white-tailed deer,
cottontail rabbit, porcupine.
• Carnivorous mammals feed mainly on other animals, including insects.
Examples: weasel, wolf, badger.
• Omnivorous mammals eat both plants and animals. Examples: raccoon,
skunk, bear.
• Insectivorous mammals feed on insects. Examples: the majority of
North American shrews and bats.


52 MAMMAL STUDY
The Food Chains of Mammals.
The Importance of the Soil
The foundation of any animal com-
munity (either on land or in the
water) is the soil. If the soil is
fertile, it will produce a flour-
ishing plant growth. This
will support a vigorous
and abundant population
of animals.
The water that flows
from the soil also will
carry dissolved miner-
als (natural fertilizer)
that will permit a healthy
growth of plants in the
water. This will be the basis
of the aquatic food chain
and of populations of such
animals as crustaceans, insects,
fish, and of mammals such as otters
and raccoons, which depend in part on
water life for their food.
This very close connection between the soil, the plants,
and all animal life is part of the web of nature. Each strand of
the web depends on the other strands. The soil nurtures the
plants. As they die and decay, the plants enrich the soil. The
animals must have the plants to live. And when the animals die,
their bodies decompose and help to make the soil more fertile.
The Pyramid of Numbers
Sometimes biologists picture this life community supported
by the land as a “pyramid of numbers.” The smallest animals
are at the bottom. There are lots of them, and they live, for
the most part, directly on vegetation. In the next level of
this pyramid are animals larger in size and fewer in number.
Some of them will feed on lesser creatures in the step below,
and some will live on plants.
PLANT-EATER
PLANT- AND
ANIMAL-EATER
FLESH-EATER
DEATH
DECOMPOSERS
BASIC
NUTRIENTS
PLANTS
Terrestrial food chain


MAMMAL STUDY 53
.The Food Chains of Mammals
As we go up the pyramid, the number
of animals gets smaller, and they get larger
in size. On top of the whole heap is a large
flesh-eater, such as the cougar, wolf, coyote,
bobcat, eagle, or horned owl, depending
on the area. This animal could eat any
of those below it.
The populations of different
animals along the food chain
will change with time. Now one
animal will be plentiful, then
another. They will increase and
decline, like the teetering of
a pair of scales. Usually,
however, the vegetable-
eaters will not get so
abundant that they
destroy the plants they
live on. When they get
too numerous, their
enemies have good
hunting; they catch the
prey that is common
and easily found.
On the other hand, meat-eaters do not increase to a
point where they wipe out the creatures that support them.
When animals like foxes, raccoons, coyotes, and wolves get
too plentiful, there is likely to be disease or other factors that
kill a lot of them off. Animals are always most healthy and
produce more young after they have been thinned out. That
is why hunting is frequently beneficial to a population.
HUMANS
ANIMALS
CARNIVORES
HERBIVORES
THE GREEN CARPET
TREES SHRUBS
GRASS HERBS
FERNS MOSSES
THE GOOD EARTH
SUN WEATHER
SOIL WATER
AS THE SOIL GOES, SO GOES ALL LIFE.
The pyramid of life
Almost anywhere you happen to study the relationships of wild animals,
you will find that they form a well-organized community. It will to some
extent show the structure of this pyramid of numbers. There will be
many small plant-eating animals and fewer of the larger predatory
kinds that live on them.





MAMMAL STUDY 55
.Reporting on Mammals
Reporting on Mammals
If you live in or near a city that has a natural history museum,
you will not want to miss a chance to visit it, even if you do
not do this optional requirement. Not only will the exhibits of
mounted mammals and study skins be very interesting to you,
but you will have a chance to see how they are prepared.
What You Will See in a Museum
Make arrangements beforehand by phoning. Your counselor
may be able to help you arrange an appointment. Tell the
museum authorities that you are a Scout working on the
Mammal Study merit badge and that you would like to
observe how specimens are prepared.
Several fascinating methods are used to prepare specimens.
For example, beetle larvae are sometimes used to clean off bits
of flesh from animal skeletons.
Many museums now freeze-dry whole animals to preserve
them for display. The animal is first put into a natural pose
and then frozen into that position by pouring liquid nitrogen
over the joints. The liquid nitrogen freezes the joints almost
instantaneously. The entire specimen is then placed in a freezer.
When it has frozen solid, it is put in a vacuum chamber where
it is slowly dried out. This process gives the museum a speci-
men that resembles the live animal as closely as possible. It is
so natural that fleas on the mammal are preserved with it, just
as they were in life.
Cataloging Specimens
Not all the mammal specimens a museum has are on display
all the time. Many are filed away in drawers, cabinets, or other
containers. Because it would be very easy for a museum to
lose track of all its specimens, a record of each one is kept in
a central file.
Older methods
of preserving
mammals include
taxidermy, which
involves mounting
the skin over a
built-up model of
the animal, wax
impregnation of
the animal’s body,
and study skins,
which were
covered in
requirement 4(a).


56 MAMMAL STUDY
Reporting on Mammals.
A catalog gives the number assigned to each specimen.
It includes information about its species, sex, size, where and
when it was found, and the type of preparation (mounted,
study skin, skull only, etc.).
Purposes of a Museum
What good is a big collection of all these study skins, mounted
specimens, and bones? Well, if you learn anything at all on
your visit to a museum, it will have served its main purpose—
education. And that would be reason enough to have natural
history museums.
But such museums serve another purpose—to help sci-
entists in their work. Museums give scientists the chance to
examine and study thousands of mammal specimens—many
times the number they could find and catch by themselves. If
a zoologist had to trap every single mammal he or she wanted
to study, it would be difficult to study very many during his or
her lifetime.
A Mammal’s Life History
Requirements 4(c) and 3(c) call for you to give a life history of a mam-
mal; the difference between the two requirements is that one deals with
a game animal—that is, one for which there are hunting or trapping
regulations. You can find out which are game mammals in your state by
checking with a conservation officer or a sporting goods store.
For example, suppose you decide to find out the life story of a
mouse. No matter where you live, you could do it because one or more
of the species is in
every part of America—
including our cities.
You may have a
little difficulty actually
seeing mice that come
out at night (nocturnal)
and stay in their nests
during the day. But if
you go into fields dur-
ing the day and search
around grass runways,American bison


MAMMAL STUDY 57
.Reporting on Mammals
you may stumble on a young family of meadow voles, which are active
during the day (diurnal). In the city, in cleaning up around garbage
cans, you may find nests of house mice. In an abandoned bird’s nest or
hollow logs, you may find the white-footed or deer mouse.
You can get information about a particular mammal from personal
observation and from talking with your science teacher, a conservation
officer, or anyone who knows wildlife. You also can refer to books, such
as those listed in the resources section in this pamphlet.
The requirements ask that you write a “life history,” but it need
not be in story form. Your counselor will be more impressed if you
gather accurate data. Written questions and answers will impress
your counselor more than a real story that is weak on facts.
Notice that requirement 4(c) says “a native game mammal that lives
in your area.” Not all game mammals now living in your area are neces-
sarily native. They may have been imported from some other area.
Deer


58 MAMMAL STUDY
Managing Mammals.
All mammals
need food, water,
shelter, and living
space. Without all
four they cannot
survive. And so,
if you want to
influence their
numbers, you
must adjust the
environment to
their needs.
Managing Mammals
We have seen that the number of mammals a given area
of land or water will support is called its carrying capacity.
To influence that number, we must improve the habitat in
some way.
If, for example, you would like to see more cottontails
around your home, you might plant shrubs for food, and you
might build a brush pile for cover. On the other hand, if you
live in a city and your building is overrun with mice and rats,
you would want to eliminate them. The best way is to clean
up trash piles and keep a tight lid on garbage cans. Here are
a few possible projects.
Black-footed ferret


MAMMAL STUDY 59
.Managing Mammals
The bat is the only mammal that can truly fly—not
just glide. Many species of bats use a technique
called echolocation to find insects and to avoid
bumping into things as they fly at night. The bat
emits a high-pitched sound that bounces off objects
and returns, allowing the bat to judge the distance
of the object.
Bats roost in caves or cavelike habitats during
the day, and emerge at dusk to hunt. Many bat spe-
cies feed on insects. A single bat is capable of eating
500 mosquitoes a night! Some Central and South
American species consume blood and are a pest
mainly to birds and livestock. Some consume fruit,
pollen, and nectar.
Healthy bats avoid humans, so never touch a
bat. If it lets you approach, it could bite you and
transmit rabies.
Bat House*
You will need the following materials:
nn One 2-by-4-foot sheet of 1/2-inch outdoor grade plywood
nn An 8-inch piece of 1-by-2-inch pine
nn 20 to 30 11/4-inch coated deck or exterior-grade
Phillips screws
nn One pint of water-based black exterior stain
nn One pint of water-based exterior primer
nn One quart of flat, water-based exterior paint or stain
nn One tube of paintable latex caulk
nn A 1-by-3-by-28-inch board (optional, but recommended)
nn Black asphalt shingles or galvanized metal (optional)
nn 107/8-inch roofing nails (optional)
*Bat house plans reprinted with permission of Bat Conservation International Inc.
For more information about bats and bat conservation, visit batcon.org.


60 MAMMAL STUDY
To construct the bat house,
follow these steps.
Step 1—Measure and cut the
plywood sheet into three pieces,
measuring 261/2 inches by 2 feet,
161/2 inches by 2 feet, and
5 inches by 2 feet.
Step 2—Roughen one side of
the largest piece by cutting hori-
zontal grooves with a sharp object or a saw. Space the
grooves 1/2 inch apart, cutting 1/32 inch to 1/16 inch deep.
Step 3—Apply two coats of black, water-based stain on
one side of the grooved board and one side of the other
two cut boards. Note: Do not use paint, because it will
fill the grooves in the backboard,
making it unusable.
Step 4—Measure and cut the
pine strip into one 24-inch piece
and two 201/4-inch pieces. Apply
a strip of caulk to the pine pieces,
then attach them to the
backboard. Reinforce
with the screws.
Step 5—Apply caulk
to the pine pieces
again, then attach the
front board. Reinforce
the front of the house with screws.
Step 6—Caulk around all outside joints to
further seal the roosting chamber.
Step 7 (optional)—Attach the 1-by-3-by-28-inch
board to the top of the house as a roof.
Step 8—Apply primer to the assembled bat house
and follow with two coats of exterior paint or stain.
Step 9 (optional)—Use roofing nails to attach
shingles or galvanized metal to the roof.
26.5” 16.5”
4”
5”
1
2
7
4


MAMMAL STUDY 61
.Managing Mammals
Squirrel and Raccoon Nest Box
The types of homes for different species are, of course,
different. Raccoons need a fairly large cavity in a tree
or hollow log, while squirrels require a smaller one in
which to build their nests. Raccoon boxes should be
placed in a wooded area not too far from water, while a
squirrel box belongs in an oak or nut tree woodland.
Wooden nail kegs with a “roof” and an entrance
hole would make a good mammal box. Be sure to place
the hole on the side for easy entrance, and cut the
entrance hole a little larger for bigger mammals like
the raccoon.
Finding a suitable place to mount a bat house will greatly increase
the chances that a bat will choose to live there. Bat Conservation
International offers several tips for choosing a good location.*
• Places that receive full, all-day sunlight are best.
• Bats are content in areas of diverse habitat and natural vegetation,
within 1/4 mile of water.
• Bat houses should be mounted on poles or buildings, not trees or
metal siding.
• The houses should be located at least 12 feet from the ground;
15 to 20 feet is better.
• Install a bat house at any time of the year.
*See batcon.org. Click on "Media & Info," and then "Information Flyers."
SQUIRREL NEST BOX
RACCOON NEST BOX


62 MAMMAL STUDY
Resources for Mammal Study.
Scouting Literature
Pocket Guide to Mammals; Animal
Science, Dog Care, Environmental
Science, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Nature, Pets, and Veterinary Medicine
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Alderton, David. Foxes, Wolves, and Wild
Dogs of the World. Sterling, 1998.
Barkhausen, Annette, and Franz Geiser.
Rabbits and Hares. Gareth Stevens, 1994.
Bowen, Betsy. Tracks in the Wild.
Little, Brown, 1993.
Bowers, Nora, Rick Bowers, and Kenn
Kaufman. Mammals of North America.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2004.
Carwardine, Mark, et al. Whales,
Dolphins, and Porpoises. Nature
Company: Time-Life Books, 1998.
Chinery, Michael, ed. The Kingfisher
Illustrated Encyclopedia of Animals:
From Aardvark to Zorille—and 2,000
Other Animals. Kingfisher Books, 1992.
Elbroch, Mark. Animal Skulls:
A Guide to North American Species.
Stackpole Books, 2006.
———. Mammal Tracks and Sign:
A Guide to North American Species.
Stackpole Books, 2003.
Graham, Gary L. Bats of the World.
St. Martin’s Press, 2001.
Halfpenny, James. A Field Guide to
Mammal Tracking. Johnson Books, 1988.
Hare, Tony. Animal Fact File:
Head-to-Tail Profiles of More Than
100 Animals. Facts On File, 1999.
Hodge, Deborah. Deer, Moose, Elk,
and Caribou. Kids Can Press, 1999.
Lumpkin, Susan. Small Cats. Facts
On File, 1993.
Miller, Sara Swan. Rodents: From Mice
to Muskrats. Franklin Watts, 1998.
Stewart, Brent S., Phillip J. Clapham,
and James A. Powell. Audubon
Society Guide to Marine Mammals
of the World. Knopf, 2002.
Vaughan, Terry A., James M. Ryan,
and Nicholas J. Czaplewski.
Mammalogy, 5th ed. Jones and
Bartlett Learning, 2010.
Whitaker, John O. National Audubon
Society Field Guide to North American
Mammals. Alfred A. Knopf, 1996.
Wilson, Don E., and Sue Ruff.
Smithsonian Book of North American
Mammals. Smithsonian Books, 1999.
Zim, Herbert Spencer, and Donald F.
Hoffmeister. Mammals: A Guide
to Familiar American Species.
Golden Press, 1987.
Resources for Mammal Study


MAMMAL STUDY 63
.Resources for Mammal Study
Organizations and Websites
American Society of Mammalogists
P.O. Box 7060
Lawrence, KS 66044
Telephone: 785-843-1234
mammalsociety.org
Association of Zoos and Aquariums
8403 Colesville Road, Suite 710
Silver Spring, MD 20910-3314
Telephone: 301-562-0777
aza.org
Bat Conservation International
500 North Capital of Texas Highway
Austin, TX 78746
Telephone: 512-327-9721
batcon.org
National Audubon Society
225 Varick St.
New York, NY 10014
Telephone: 844-428-3826
audubon.org
National Wildlife Federation
11100 Wildlife Center Drive
Reston, VA 20190
Telephone: 800-822-9919
nwf.org
Smithsonian National Zoo and
Conservation Biology Institute
3001 Connecticut Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20008
Telephone: 202-633-2614
nationalzoo.si.edu/conservation
Acknowledgments
For reviewing and suggesting updates
to this edition of the pamphlet,
Scouting America thanks Dr. Verity
L. Mathis, University of Florida-
Gainesville, Mammal Collections
Manager. We also give special thanks
to longtime Scouter Gary M. Stolz,
Ph.D., for his assistance with the
photography in this merit badge
pamphlet. Dr. Stolz is with the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service and serves as
its refuge manager for the John Heinz
National Wildlife Refuge at Tinicum
and Cusano National Environmental
Education Center in Pennsylvania.
Thanks to the Bat Conservation
International, Austin, Texas, for
allowing us to reprint with permission
its plans for the bat house.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Scott Bauer, USDA Agricultural Resource
Service, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 20 (white-tailed deer)
Brand X Pictures, Bugs & Insects,
©2001—page 11 (arachnids,
gastropods, annelida)
Corbis Images/PictureQuest, ©2000—
page 11 (porifera)
DigitalVision/PictureQuest, ©2000—
page 11 (cephalopods)
Peggy Greb, USDA Agricultural
Resource Service, courtesy—
page 11 (nemathelminths)
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(seal, gorillas, horses, prairie dog)
HAAP Media Ltd./Yvonne Malone,
courtesy—cover (tiger)
Hemera Technologies Inc., ©1994–2001—
page 11 (myriapods, insects, mammals,
amphibians, birds, echinodermata)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration/Dr. James P. McVey,
NOAA Sea Grant Program, courtesy—
page 11 (bivalves)
OAR/National Undersea Research
Program, Hawaii Undersea Research
Lab/J. Moore—page 11 (coelenterate)
PhotoDisc Inc., ©1996—page 11 (protozoa)
Terry Spivey, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 7


64 MAMMAL STUDY
Resources for Mammal Study.
University of California–Berkeley—
page 11 (platyhelminths)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, courtesy
—pages 21 (bobcat) and 50
(badger, bear)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/
Bill Buchanan, courtesy—page 21
(raccoon)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Phyllis
Cooper, courtesy—page 56
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Ryan
Hagerty, courtesy—page 58 (ferret)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/
Steve Hillebrand, courtesy—
page 21 (black bear)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/William
R. James, courtesy—page 50 (rabbit)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Robert
Karges II, courtesy—page 20 (elk)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Gary
Kramer, courtesy—page 20 (wolf)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Ronald
Laubenstein, courtesy—page 20
(red fox)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Addison
Mohler, courtesy—page 57
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/
Keith Ramos, courtesy—page 22
(manatee)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Duane
Raver, courtesy—page 11 (fishes)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/
Ron Singer, courtesy—page 29
©Wim van Egmond, micropolitan.tk
—page 11 (ctenophora)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 13
(platypus), 21 (vole, weasel),
22 (skunk), 30, and 50 (shrew)
Wikimedia.org/Böhringer Friedrich,
courtesy—page 25
Wikimedia.org/Jon Houseman, courtesy
—page 11 (lower chordates)
Wikimedia.org/Reinhard Kraasch,
courtesy—page 22 (woodchuck)
Wikimedia.org/Mariomassone,
courtesy—page 22 (mink)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Dan Bryant—pages 23 (boy with
binoculars), 41, and 45
Gene Daniels—page 54
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 19, 26, 33, 36, 37, 38, 39, 49,
52, 53, 60, and 61
Brian Payne—pages 5, 17 (main photo
in photo illustration), 27 (casting
series), 48, and 58 (people)
Randy Piland—pages 23 (squirrel)
and 47
Steve Seeger—pages 9 and 13 (rabbit)