SPORTS

BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES

SPORTS

“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”

Requirements
Note: The activities used to fulfill the requirements for the Sports
merit badge may not be used to help fulfill requirements for other
merit badges.
1. Do the following:
a. Explain to your counselor the most likely risks you may
encounter during athletics activities and what you should
do to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to
these risks.
b. Show
	
that you know first aid or understand the treatment
for injuries that could occur while participating in athletics,
including sprains, strains, muscle cramps, contusions,
abrasions, blisters, dehydration, heat reactions, and
concussions.
c. The importance of maintaining a healthy diet.
2. Explain the following:
a. Before completing requirements 4 and 5, show that you
have received a physical examination from your health care
practioner within the last 12 months.
b. Explain the importance of the physical exam.
c. Explain the importance of maintaining good health habits
for life (such as exercising regularly), and how the use of
tobacco products , alcohol, and other harmful substances
can negatively affect your health and your performance in
sports activities.
d. Explain the importance of maintaining a healthy diet.
3. Discuss the following:
a. The importance of warming up and cooling down.
35954
ISBN 978-0-8395-0151-0
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2021 Printing

b. The importance of weight training.
c. What an amateur athlete is and the differences between an
amateur and a professional athlete.
d. The attributes (qualities) of a good sport, the importance of
sportsmanship, and the traits of a good team leader and
player who exhibits Scout spirit on and off the playing field.
4. Take part for one season (or four months) as a competitive
individual or as a member of an organized team in TWO of the
following sports: baseball, basketball, bowling, cross-country,
field hockey, football, golf gymnastics, ice hockey, lacrosse,
soccer, softball, swimming, table tennis, tennis, track and field,
volleyball, water polo, wrestling, cheerleading, and/or
badminton. Your counselor may approve in advance other
recognized sports, but not any sport that is restricted and not
authorized by the BSA:
Then with your chosen sports do the following:
a. Give the rules and etiquette for the two sports you picked.
b. List the equipment needed for the two sports you chose.
Describe the protective equipment and appropriate clothing
(if any) and explain why it is needed.
c. Draw diagrams of the playing area for your two sports.
5. With guidance from your counselor and before beginning
requirement 4, establish a personal training program suited to
the activities you chose for requirement 4. Do the following:
a. Organize a chart and track your training, practice,
and development in the sports for one
season or four months
b. Demonstrate proper technique for
your two chosen sports.
c. At the end of the season, share your
completed chart with your counselor
and discuss how your participation
in the sports you chose has affected
you mentally and physically.

SPORTS    3

Sports Resources.

Sports Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys, Scouts BSA
Handbook for Girls; Emergency First
Aid pocket guide; Be Prepared First
Aid Book; Archery, Athletics, Canoeing,
Climbing, Cycling, First Aid, Golf,
Horsemanship, Kayaking, Personal
Fitness, Rowing, Safety, Scuba Diving,
Skating, Small-Boat Sailing, Snow
Sports, Swimming, and Water Sports
merit badge pamphlets
For more information about
Scouting-related resources, visit
the BSA’s online retail catalog
(with your parent’s permission)
at http://www.scoutstuff.org.

Books
Bauer, Gerhard. New Soccer Techniques,
Tactics & Teamwork. Sterling
Publishing, 2002.
Dearing, Joel. Volleyball Fundamentals.
Human Kinetics, 2003.
Dintiman, George Blough. Speed
Improvement for Young Athletes:
How to Sprint Faster in Your Sport in
30 Workouts. National Association
of Speed and Explosion, 2006.

4    SPORTS

Driver, Bruce. The Baffled Parent’s
Guide to Coaching Youth Hockey.
International Marine/Ragged
Mountain Press, 2004.
Faigenbaum, Avery D., and Wayne L.
Westcott. Youth Strength Training:
Programs for Health, Fitness and
Sport. Human Kinetics, 2009.
Fortin, Francois. Sports: The Complete
Visual Reference. Firefly Books, 2003.
Greene, Larry. Training for Young
Distance Runners. Human
Kinetics, 2004.
Hammond, Tim. Sports. Dorling
Kindersley Eyewitness Books, 2005.
Heitzmann, Ray. Careers for Sports
Nuts & Other Athletic Types.
McGraw-Hill, 2004.
Lancaster, Scott. Athletic Fitness for
Kids. Human Kinetics, 2007.
McIntosh, Ned. Managing Little
League. McGraw-Hill, 2008.
Micheli, Lyle, and Mark Jenkins. The
Sports Medicine Bible for Young
Athletes. Source Books Inc., 2001.
Paye, Burrall, and Patrick Paye.
Youth Basketball Drills. Human
Kinetics, 2000.

.Sports Resources

Plays, F.B. Unbeatable Flag Football
Plays. Kindle Edition, 2011.
Werner, Doug. Bowler’s Start-up: A
Beginner’s Guide to Bowling. Tracks
Publishing, 1995.

Organizations and Websites
American College of Sports Medicine
401 West Michigan St.
Indianapolis, IN 46202-3233
Telephone: 317-637-9200
Website: http://www.acsm.org

Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to
Warren Franke, Ph.D., for his assistance
in preparing this revised and updated
edition of the Sports merit badge
pamphlet and to the following for their
assistance with previous editions
• Lynn Harmon, ACE-certified
personal trainer

American Council on Exercise
Toll-free telephone: 888-825-3636
Website: http://www.acefitness.org

• Benone “Ben” Cristian Grigore,
technical/coaching development
director, USA Table Tennis

Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention
Brain Injury Website:
http://www.cdc.gov/HeadsUp/

• Tom Tracey, director of officials,
Collegiate Water Polo Association

Human Kinetics Coach Education
Telephone: 217-351-5076
Website: http://www.asep.com

The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the men and women serving on the
Merit Badge Maintenance Task Force
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.

Institute for International Sport—
National Sportsmanship Day
Website: https://internationalsport.org/
national-sportsmanship-day
National Federation of State
High School Associations
P.O. Box 690
Indianapolis, IN 46206
Telephone: 317-972-6900
Website: http://www.nfhs.org
National Youth Sports Health
& Safety Institute
Website: http://www.nyshsi.org
United States Olympic Committee
One Olympic Plaza
Colorado Springs, CO 80909
Website: http://www.teamusa.org
SPORTS    5

