GARDENINGSTEM-B a s e d
STEM-Based


GARDENING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35902
ISBN 978-0-8395-3240-8
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Before any Scouts choose optional requirement 8e,
they should first find out whether they are allergic
to bee stings. This can be determined by a visit to
an allergist or family physician. If it turns out Scouts
are allergic to bee stings, they should choose
another option. If Scouts visit a beekeeper with their
buddy, that buddy also should be checked for
allergies by a physician before the visitation.
Prior to counseling Scouts, Gardening merit badge
counselors are strongly encouraged to become familiar with
the Guide to Safe Scouting, a helpful planning tool for all
Scouting volunteers. This resource provides an overview of
Scouting policies and procedures rather than comprehensive,
standalone documentation. For some items, the policy
statements are complete. However, unit leaders are expected
to review the additional reference materials cited (such as
the Guide to Safe Scouting and the First Aid merit badge
pamphlet) prior to conducting certain activities. Counselors can
access the Guide to Safe Scouting online by visiting
scouting.org/health-and-safety/gss/.
To help keep participants safe during Scouting activities,
the National Council has an established set of procedures
called the SAFE Checklist (scouting.org/health-and-safety/
safe). In an effort to assist Gardening merit badge counselors,
the following considerations provide additional guidance of
special interest to them.
FPO


GARDENING 3
Qualified Supervision. The Gardening merit badge counselor
should have knowledge of the proper use of gardening tools
and pesticides, and applicable local and state USDA regulations
for handling bees and beekeeping equipment.
Physical Fitness. Counselors should be aware of youth
participants who may be allergic to bee stings and to pesticides
and fungicides used in gardening.
Safe Area or Course. Counselors should take reasonable
measures to provide participants with a safe gardening
environment and well-constructed hives that pass
USDA inspection.
Equipment Selection and Maintenance. Counselors should
ensure gardening tools and equipment are well-maintained and
hives follow USDA guidelines.
Personal Safety Equipment. Counselors should ensure all
participants are wearing proper protective gardening clothing and
equipment such as gloves, long pants, an air mask, and safety
glasses when preparing and applying chemicals. Protective gear
for beekeeping includes: hat, veil, coveralls, gloves, long sleeves,
pants, and other protective devices.
Applicable Laws. Counselors teaching this merit badge must
have experience with gardening tasks and tools and be recruited
to do the work involved. As a rule, Scouting activities may
not include activities for youth that, by law, they would not
be allowed to do in the workplace. It is important also to obey
restrictions manufacturers impose or suggest for the use of their
tools or other products, or potentially hazardous chemicals such
as pesticides, fungicides, and fertilizers.
Discipline. Counselors should take reasonable measures to
ensure all participants are using gardening and beekeeping
tools and equipment properly.
The SAFE Checklist is available by visiting: scouting.org/
health-and-safety/safe/.


4 GARDENING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Gardening or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.


GARDENING 5





GARDENING 7
Contents
Gardening Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Garden Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Growing Fruits and Vegetables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Growing Ornamental Plants and Grasses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Nurturing Your Garden . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
All About Bees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Careers in Gardening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Gardening Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96





GARDENING 9
.Gardening Basics
Gardening
Basics
Humans have been growing plants for
thousands of years. Farmers and horti-
culturists make their living growing food
and other plants, while other people grow
gardens for pleasure. Botanists and agricul-
tural scientists study plants and how they grow.
To be a good gardener, you will need to understand
the science of growing plants—how to prepare the soil, how to
select and plant seeds, and how to care for the growing plants.
When the plants have grown up, or matured, you can harvest
their flowers, fruits, or vegetables—called produce—and sell or
keep the produce.
Gardens feed us, heal our bodies, and give us beautiful
flowers. Whatever kind of garden you choose to grow today,
and whatever you want to be when you grow up, gardens will
always be a part of your life.
Regions of the United States
Before you plan your garden, find out about the agricultural
region where you live. Knowing the region in which your garden
is located will help you select the right types of plants to grow.
For example, the directions for growing a particular seed packet
may say that the plant will be winter hardy through zone 3.
That means that anyone who lives in zones 4 through 13 can
grow that particular plant outside without fear of it succumbing
to the cold of winter.
You can get a map (more detailed than the one shown on
the next page) of the agricultural regions for the United States
from the U.S. Department of Agriculture (see the resources
section at the end of this pamphlet). Use the map to locate
your town and region.


10 GARDENING
Gardening Basics.
USDA Hardiness Zones for the United States


GARDENING 11
.Gardening Basics
The frost dates in the growing season chart are the averages
for a light freeze (32 degrees); average temperatures in your
local area may vary from those listed here. The possibility of
frost occurring after the spring dates and before the fall dates
is 50 percent. The following classification of freeze temperatures
is usually based on the temperatures’ effect on plants:
• Light freeze: 29 degrees to 32 degrees—tender plants killed,
with little destructive effect on other plants
• Moderate freeze: 25 degrees to 28 degrees—a great amount
of damage to most vegetation, with heavy damage to fruit
blossoms and tender plants
• Severe freeze: 24 degrees and colder—most plants damaged
or destroyed
Once you have determined the last frost date for your region,
you can plan your garden. Your plants will need good sunlight,
water, food, and soil. Most vegetables and fruits grow best in full
sunlight. You will need
to decide whether to
grow your garden in the
ground or in containers.
If you live in a house,
find a nice sunny place
in your yard. Usually,
a southern or western
exposure works best. If
you live in an apartment,
use a barrel or large
plastic or clay flowerpots
to grow your garden.
Then you can decide
what kind of plants you
want to grow, and what
kind of plant food, called
fertilizer, will help them
grow. The chart showing
growing regions provides
a list of sample plants by
USDA growing region.


12 GARDENING
Gardening Basics.
Average growing seasons in the United States*
*This information was taken from the USDA website.
**Frosts do not occur every year in these locations.
Growing Season Last Frost First Frost
City, State No. of Days Spring Fall
Mobile, Ala. 272 Feb. 27 Nov. 26
Juneau, Alaska 133 May 16 Sept. 26
Phoenix, Ariz. 308 Feb. 5 Dec. 15
Tucson, Ariz. 273 Feb. 28 Nov. 29
Pine Bluff, Ark. 234 Mar. 19 Nov. 8
Eureka, Calif. 324 Jan. 30 Dec. 15
Sacramento, Calif. 289 Feb. 14 Dec. 1
San Francisco, Calif. ** ** **
Denver, Colo. 157 May 3 Oct. 8
Hartford, Conn. 167 April 25 Oct. 10
Wilmington, Del. 198 April 13 Oct. 29
Miami, Fla. ** ** **
Tampa, Fla. 338 Jan. 28 Jan. 3
Athens, Ga. 224 March 28 Nov. 8
Savannah, Ga. 250 March 10 Nov. 15
Boise, Idaho 153 May 8 Oct. 9
Chicago, Ill. 187 April 22 Oct. 26
Springfield, Ill. 185 April 17 Oct. 19
Indianapolis, Ind. 180 April 22 Oct. 20
South Bend, Ind. 169 May 1 Oct. 18
Atlantic, Iowa 141 May 9 Sept. 28
Cedar Rapids, Iowa 161 April 29 Oct. 7
Topeka, Kan. 175 April 21 Oct. 14
Lexington, Ky. 190 April 17 Oct. 25


GARDENING 13
.Gardening Basics
Last Frost First Frost
City, State No. of Days Spring Fall
Monroe, La. 242 March 9 Nov. 7
New Orleans, La. 288 Feb. 20 Dec. 5
Portland, Maine 143 May 10 Sept. 30
Baltimore, Md. 231 March 26 Nov. 13
Worcester, Mass. 172 April 27 Oct. 17
Lansing, Mich. 140 May 13 Sept. 30
Marquette, Mich. 159 May 12 Oct. 19
Duluth, Minn. 122 May 21 Sept. 21
Willmar, Minn. 152 May 4 Oct. 4
Columbus, Miss. 215 March 27 Oct. 29
Vicksburg, Miss. 250 March 13 Nov. 18
Jefferson City, Mo. 173 April 26 Oct. 16
Fort Peck, Mont. 146 May 5 Sept. 28
Helena, Mont. 122 May 18 Sept. 18
Blair, Neb. 165 April 27 Oct. 10
North Platte, Neb. 136 May 11 Sept. 24
Las Vegas, Nev. 259 March 7 Nov. 21
Concord, N.H. 121 May 23 Sept. 22
Newark, N.J. 219 April 4 Nov. 10
Carlsbad, N.M. 223 March 29 Nov. 7
Los Alamos, N.M. 157 May 8 Oct. 13
Albany, N.Y. 144 May 7 Sept. 29
Syracuse, N.Y. 170 April 28 Oct. 16
Fayetteville, N.C. 212 April 2 Oct. 31
Bismarck, N.D. 129 May 14 Sept. 20
Akron, Ohio 168 May 3 Oct. 18


14 GARDENING
Gardening Basics.
Last Frost First Frost
City, State No. of Days Spring Fall
Cincinnati, Ohio 195 April 14 Oct. 27
Lawton, Okla. 217 April 1 Nov. 5
Tulsa, Okla. 218 March 30 Nov. 4
Pendleton, Ore. 188 April 15 Oct. 21
Portland, Ore. 217 April 3 Nov. 7
Carlisle, Pa. 182 April 20 Oct. 20
Williamsport, Pa. 168 April 29 Oct. 15
Kingston, R.I. 144 May 8 Sept. 30
Charleston, S.C. 253 March 11 Nov. 20
Columbia, S.C. 211 April 4 Nov. 2
Rapid City, S.D. 145 May 7 Sept. 29
Memphis, Tenn. 228 March 23 Nov. 7
Nashville, Tenn. 207 April 5 Oct. 29
Amarillo, Texas 197 April 14 Oct. 29
Denton, Texas 231 March 25 Nov. 12
San Antonio, Texas 265 March 3 Nov. 24
Cedar City, Utah 134 May 20 Oct. 2
Spanish Fork, Utah 156 May 8 Oct. 12
Burlington, Vt. 142 May 11 Oct. 1
Norfolk, Va. 239 March 23 Nov. 17
Richmond, Va. 198 April 10 Oct. 26
Seattle, Wash. 232 March 24 Nov. 11
Spokane, Wash. 153 May 4 Oct. 5
Parkersburg, W.Va. 175 April 25 Oct. 18
Green Bay, Wis. 143 May 12 Oct. 2
Janesville, Wis. 164 April 28 Oct. 10
Casper, Wyo. 123 May 22 Sept. 22


GARDENING 15
.Gardening Basics
Growing Regions
USDA Zone,
Low Temperature,
Example Cities Plant by Botanical Name (and Common Name)
Betula glandulosa (Dwarf birch)
Empetrum nigrum (Crowberry)
Below -50 degrees F Populus fremuloides (Quaking aspen)
Fairbanks, Alaska Potentilla pensylvanica (Pennsylvania cinquefoil)
Rhododendron lapponicum
(Lapland rhododendron)
Salix reticulate (Netleaf willow)
Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (Bearberry)
Betula papyrifera (Paper birch)
-50 to -40 degrees F Cornus canadensis (Bunchberry dogwood)
Prudhoe Bay, Alaska Elaeagnus commutata (Silverberry)
Unalakleet, Alaska Larix laricina (Eastern larch)
Pinecreek, Minn. Potentilla fruticosa (Bush cinquefoil)
Ulmus americana (American elm)
Viburnum trilobum (American cranberry bush)
Berberis thunbetgii (Japanese bayberry)
Betula pendula (European white birch)
-40 to -30 degrees F Cornus alba (Tatarian dogwood)
International Falls, Minn. Elaeagnus angustifolia (Russian olive)
St. Michael, Alaska Junipercus communes (Common juniper)
Tomahawk, Wis. Lonicera tatarica (Tatarian honeysuckle)
Sidney, Mont. Malus baocata (Siberian crabapple)
Rhododendron southern Indian hybrids
(Indian azalea)
Syringa vulgaris (Common lilac)
Thuia occidentalis (American arborvitae)
*This information was taken from the USDA website.
USDA growing regions and suggested plants*
1Zone
Zone 2
Zone 3


16 GARDENING
Gardening Basics.
Acer saccharum (Sugar maple)
Acer platanoides (Norway maple)
-30 to -20 degrees Aristolochia durior (Dutchman’s pipe)
Minneapolis/ Forsythia ovata (Early forsythia)
St. Paul, Minn. Hydrangea paniculata (Panicle hydrangea)
Lewistown, Mont. Juniperus chinensis (Chinese juniper)
Northwood, Iowa Ligustrum amurense (Amur river privet)
Omaha, Neb. Parthenocissus quinquefolia (Virginia creeper)
Spiraea x vanhouttei (Vanhouffe spirea)
Cornus florida (Flowering dogwood)
Deutzia gracilis (Slender deutzia)
-20 to -10 degrees F Forsythia suspensa (Weeping forsythia)
Des Moines, Iowa Ginkgo biloba (Ginkgo, Maidenhair tree)
Chicago, Ill. Hibiscus syriacus (Shrub althea)
Columbia, Mo. Iberis sempervirens (Evergreen candytuft)
Mansfield, Pa. Lagerstroemia indica (Crape myrtle)
Ligustrum vulgare (Common privet)
Mahonia aquifolium (Oregon hollygrape)
Metasequoia glyptostroboides
(Dawn redwood)
Rhododendron “America” (Hybrid rhododendron)
Paithenocissus tricuspidata (Boston ivy)
Rosa multiflora (Japanese rose)
Taxus cuspidata (Japanese yew)
Viburnum burkwoodii (Burkwood viburnum)
Acer palmatum (Japanese maple)
Buxus sempervirens (Common boxwood)
-10 to 0 degrees F Cercis chinensis (Chinese redbud)
St. Louis, Mo. Chamaecyparis lawsoniana (Lawson cypress)
Lebanon, Pa. Cytisus x praecox (Warminster broom)
McMinnville, Tenn. Euonymus follunei (Winter creeper)
Branson, Mo. Hedera helix (English ivy)
Ilex opaca (American holly)
Ligustrum ovalifolium (California privet)
Pieris japonica (Japanese andromeda)
Prunus yedoensis (Yoshino cherry)
Zone 4
Zone 5
Zone 6


GARDENING 17
.Gardening Basics
Acer macrophylium (Bigleaf maple)
0 to 10 degrees F Rhododendron Kurume hybrids (Kurume azalea)
Oklahoma City, Okla. Cedrus atlantica (Atlas cedar)
South Boston, Va. Cotoneaster microphylla (Small-leaf cotoneaster)
Little Rock, Ark. Ilex aquifolium (English holly)
Griffin, Ga. Taxus baccata (English yew)
Arbutus unedo (Strawberry tree)
10 to 20 degrees F Choisya temata (Mexican orange)
Tifton, Ga. Olearia haastii (New Zealand daisy bush)
Dallas, Texas Pittosporum tobira (Japanese pittosporum)
Austin, Texas Prunus laurocerasus (Cherry laurel)
Gainesville, Fla. Viburnum tinus (Laurestinus)
Asparagus setacous (Asparagus fern)
20 to 30 degrees F Eucalyptus globulus (Tasmanian blue gum)
Houston, Texas Syzygium paniculatum (Australian bush cherry)
St. Augustine, Fla. Fuchsia hybrids (Fuchsia)
Brownsville, Texas Grevillea robusta (Silk oak)
Fort Pierce, Fla. Schinus molle (California pepper tree)
Bougainvillea spectabilis (Bougainvillea)
30 to 40 degrees F Cassia fistula (Golden shower)
Naples, Fla. Eucalyptus citriodora (Lemon eucalyptus)
Victorville, Calif. Ficus elastica (Rubber plant)
Miami, Fla. Ensete ventricosum (Ensete)
Phoenix, Ariz. Roystonea regia (Royal palm)
Bougainvillea spectabilis (Bougainvillea)
Above 40 degrees F Cassia fistula (Golden shower)
Honolulu, Hawaii Eucalyptus citriodora (Lemon eucalyptus)
San Juan, Puerto Rico Ficus elastica (Rubber plant)
Ensete ventricosum (Ensete)
Roystonea regia (Royal palm)
Zone 7
Zone 8
Zone 9
Zone 10
Zone 11 12 13


18 GARDENING
Gardening Basics.
You can test the soil
in your garden plot
if you are unsure whether
it needs to be improved
with compost, topsoil,
humus, fertilizer, or other
additive. Inexpensive soil
test kits are available at
your local garden center.
For a more detailed test,
your county extension
service will test your soil
samples for free or at a
minimal cost.
Soil
The earth in which plants grow is called soil. The upper layers
of soil are usually made up of decaying plant material such
as leaves, mulch, and grass clippings. The lower layers of soil
are made up of rocks and minerals that have crumbled with
age and wear. Rain, earthworms, fungi, bacteria, and small
animals help the upper layers break down. When the upper
and lower layers combine, soil is formed. Sometimes, a
gardener may need to help the layers mix. This is called tilling,
or turning the soil.
There are many different kinds of soil. The soil at your
local playground might be different from the soil at your
home. Some kinds of soil contain materials that are better for
garden plots, and some kinds of plants grow only in certain
kinds of soil.


GARDENING 19
.Gardening Basics
Soil Types
Here are some of the kinds of soil you might find in your neighborhood.
Sandy loam soil is good for most plants. It contains a good mixture
of sand and decaying materials. However, too much sand will dry out
quickly and is not good for gardens. If the area where you want to plant
a garden is purely sand, add topsoil, organic humus, or compost (but
not more than 5%), and then till the plot before planting.
Clay loam soil is heavy and makes gardening difficult. It dries out
slowly and sometimes forms a crust on top. Clay is not good for gar-
dening unless you add sand and organic material, such as compost,
to make it easier for plant roots to grow and water to drain. If the area
where you want to plant a garden contains hard clay, add sand, top-
soil, organic humus, or compost, and then till the plot before planting.
Mucky soil is dark, rich in nutrients, and very good for growing
many different kinds of vegetables. The nutrients from decaying organ-
ic material provide a lot of food for plants. If the mucky soil in the area
where you want to plant a garden does not drain well, add sand and
then till the plot before planting.
Peat soil contains decaying vegetable matter, usually from a
forest floor, that is high in carbon. Carbon is a nutrient that helps
plants grow. Peat soil is light and almost dusty. If the area where
you want to plant a garden contains only peat, add topsoil, organic
humus, or compost, and then till the plot before planting.
Topsoil is made up of decaying vegetable matter, sand, and peat.
It dries out quickly and should be mixed with heavier soils to add
nutrients. Vegetables should not be grown in topsoil alone. If the area
where you want to plant a garden contains only topsoil, add organic
humus or potting soil, and then till the plot before planting.
Potting soil is commercially prepared and packaged soil that you
buy at a garden center. It is available in different mixtures for specific
gardening purposes. You can even buy potting soil with the fertilizer
already mixed into it. However, if you want an organic garden, or one
that grows without synthetic fertilizers and additives, use only certified
organic potting soil.





GARDENING 21
.Garden Types
Garden Types
As you learned earlier, people grow gardens for different
reasons. Flower gardens provide flowers for many different uses.
Vegetable and fruit gardens provide food. Orchards, or gardens
of fruit or nut trees, also provide food. You can dress up your
food garden by planting a few flower seeds around the edges
of the plot or in containers. It is fun to watch food and
flowers grow in the same garden because you can
see the differences in how quickly each grows
and how long each takes to mature.
Food Gardens
You can grow many different crops in a food
garden. Some of the most popular and easiest to grow
are tomatoes, strawberries, beans, carrots, corn, collards,
and broccoli. Fruit and nut trees and vines take years to grow.
Beans, corn, and tomatoes grow quickly and can be harvested
within a couple of months. They are often called summer
crops because they need warm soil and a lot of sunlight to
grow. Strawberries, collards, and broccoli need cool weather
to grow well. They often are called winter crops because they
grow during the winter months in warmer agricultural regions.
Food gardens can be grown in the ground
or in containers of soil or water. The kind of water
garden where you grow food
without using soil is called
a hydroponic garden.
Turnips, carrots, potatoes, and
radishes are examples of root
and tuber vegetables, which
bear below the ground.
Vegetables like
cucumbers,
broccoli, peppers,
and zucchini bear
above the ground.


22 GARDENING
Garden Types.
Flower Gardens
You can grow flowers in many different ways. Containers or
flower pots allow you to arrange flower gardens in different
ways and places. Flower beds are permanent displays. You can
plant a flower bed directly in the ground or in a raised bed
surrounded by landscaping timbers or stone. Flower gardens
provide color, texture, and seasonal variety. They also provide
homes for wildlife. Birds, insects, amphibians, and reptiles
thrive in natural areas like flower gardens.
Alternative Gardening
You can have a garden anywhere. If you live in an apartment,
you can grow plants in containers. If you live in a city, you
might be able to grow crops in a community garden. If you
live in the desert, you can use water-wise growing methods
to cultivate strong plants. And if you like to experiment, you
might try hydroponics, aquaculture, or a water garden.
Urban Gardening
Living in a city does not mean that you cannot earn your
Gardening merit badge. Urban, or city, gardening can be very
rewarding. You can put together your own minigarden by using
containers to grow plants indoors, or on balconies, rooftops,
doorways, windowsills, and even hanging from eaves. Books
that specialize in container gardening can help show you how.


GARDENING 23
.Garden Types
To learn more
about how to
preserve land
for community
gardens in your
city, contact the
Trust for Public
Land. (See the
resources
section.)
Most major cities, such as New York City, Chicago,
Philadelphia, and Los Angeles, have urban gardening programs,
and many smaller cities have active community gardens. These
city programs allow a gardener or group of gardeners to grow
crops on a small plot of unused land. Most times, these plots
are vacant fields that have become overwhelmed with weeds
or litter. The gardeners clean up the plot and build vegetable
gardens. They share the harvested crops with one another and
with less fortunate people, including soup kitchens that feed
homeless people.
These kinds of programs ensure the continuation of
community-managed gardens and open space in low- and
moderate-income neighborhoods. Your county agricultural
extension agent or parks department can help you learn
about urban gardens in your city.
Succulents
If you live in an arid location, succulents
may be the solution to your gardening
challenge. Succulents are ideal for grow-
ing in dry areas because they have stems
that store water in times of drought. Thick
skin and spines discourage animals and
insects. Many succulents have beautiful
flowers; some even bear delicious fruits.
Cacti will range in size from a few
inches to giant varieties such as the
saguaro and yucca, which can grow to
more than 50 feet in height and weigh up
to 8 tons.
Almost all cacti are native to the American continents, from
Canada to Brazil. Some succulents, such as Portulaca afra (moss
rose), Crassulaceae (jade plant), and Echeveria (sedum, hens and
chicks), are native to Africa and have shrubby rather than spiny
branches. Their plump leaves make them—fittingly—“succulent!”


24 GARDENING
Garden Types.
Container Gardening
Container gardening is simply growing plants in anything but
the ground. It is the easiest kind of gardening because it can
be done anywhere at any time of year. You can grow plants in
almost any container that will hold soil. Some examples include:
• Clay—the inexpensive reddish-brown
pots made of terra-cotta that you see
in every garden center
• Ceramic or glass—fancier containers
purchased for their beauty
• Concrete—heavy-duty planters that
are often large and difficult to move
• Plastic—low-cost alternative to
ceramic or glass containers
• Wood—old barrels and livestock
water troughs that add a casual look
to a garden
• Synthetic—relatively new to the
garden market, containers that look
like heavy terra-cotta or concrete
containers but are in fact made
of heavy-duty foam and are
very lightweight
Other fun containers include old
leather work boots, old bath and wash
tubs, old wooden boxes or dresser
drawers, and recycled plastics such as 2-liter drink bottles
or gallon milk jugs.
Some vegetables, such as radishes, are naturally
small and easy to grow in containers. There are also
special varieties of vegetables that were developed to
grow in small spaces. Look for the terms “patio” and
“bush” on seed packets and seedling tags. Most of
these can be grown in a 2- to 5-gallon pot. No matter
what size container you use, it must provide good
drainage and be filled with the appropriate soil.


GARDENING 25
.Garden Types
Water-Wise Gardening
One of the easiest ways to foolproof a garden is to grow
plants that will survive if you forget to water them. The term
water wise means being smart about water conservation by
applying water in well-controlled amounts and locations in
your garden. The concept of water-wise gardening is based
on the following seven rules:
1. Plan and design for water conservation and beauty from
the start. A little research into what grows where, and what
combinations work well, can create a colorful year-round garden.
2. Create practical grassy areas of manageable sizes, shapes,
and appropriate grasses. Natural areas require less water.
Use them as widely as possible.
3. Choose plants that have low water requirements.
Group plants of similar water needs. Then experiment to
determine how much and how often to water the plants.
4. Prepare the soil. Use compost or manure as needed by
the site and the type of plants used.
5. Use rocks or organic mulch, such as chips, shredded
mulch, or pine straw, to reduce evaporation and to keep the
soil cool.
6. Irrigate efficiently using properly designed systems (including
hose attachments) and by applying the right amount of water at
the right time. Early morning is best for watering plants because
it reduces evaporation and the spread of plant disease.
7. Maintain your landscape properly by mowing, weeding,
pruning, and fertilizing at the right time of year.
Caution: Do not use arsenic-treated wood containers or
timbers to grow fruits or vegetables that you or wildlife will
eat. This kind of wood leeches, or leaks, poisons into the soil.
In turn, plant roots absorb the poisons and become toxic to
people and wildlife. This kind of wood is used to build wooden decks,
some outdoor furniture, and some outdoor playground equipment. If
you cannot find a label that says the wood is untreated, do not use it.
Find an alternative.


26 GARDENING
Garden Types.
The trees and plants listed here grow successfully with limited
water. They will grow in most areas of North America, but check
with your local extension service to verify which ones are best
suited to your agricultural region.
Trees
Ash, crape myrtle,
cypress, firethorn,
juniper, oak, pine
Shrubs
Butterfly bush, chaste tree, cotoneaster,
heavenly bamboo, mallow, pomegranate,
shrub juniper Ground Covers, Vines
Carolina Jessamine, creeping
juniper, gazania, ice plant,
lantana, verbena, wisteria
(after established)
Perennials, Bulbs, Annuals
Agave, aloe, blanket flower, blue
fescue, cactus, coreopsis, daylily
(when established), desert
marigold, fountain grass, iris
(bearded), lamb’s ear, lily of the
Nile, red valerian, sage, zinnia
Crape myrtle
Lantana
Zinnia
Butterfly bush


GARDENING 27
.Garden Types
Aquaculture
Aquaculture is the practice of growing
plants and fish as sources of
food in a controlled freshwater,
saltwater, or brackish water
environment. Most aquacul-
ture farmers grow seaweed,
fish, or crustaceans like
crabs or shrimp.
Hydroponics. Hydroponics
is the science of growing
plants without dirt. The
term hydroponics means
“water working.” Growing
plants in a water and nutrient
solution, without soil, allows
a gardener to grow plants more
efficiently with less labor and time.
There are many benefits to growing
plants using hydroponics:
• Most hobby hydroponic gardens require less work than soil
gardens because there is no soil to till or weeds to pull.
• Eliminating the soil in a garden also eliminates all
soil-borne diseases.
• A hydroponic garden does not use as much water as
a soil garden does because weeds do not grow in a
hydroponic garden.
• In a hydroponic garden, plants can grow closer together,
thereby increasing your harvest from the same size garden.
• A small hydroponic garden can be set up almost anywhere.
• Some studies suggest that hydroponic produce is higher in
nutritional value than field-grown crops because the nutrients
are controlled and environmental factors like pollution and
drought are eliminated.
• Hydroponic plants can be grown year-round indoors.
Tomatoes, peppers, cucumbers, lettuce, and beans often are
grown using hydroponics. In a soil garden, plants get most
nutrients from the soil. In hydroponics, plants get nutrients
directly from the water in which they grow. Some systems


28 GARDENING
Garden Types.
use an inert growing medium, such as perlite (a lightweight
volcanic rock) or expanded clay pebbles (artificial absorbent
stones) in place of soil. These growing media support the roots
and retain and circulate nutrients to allow the plants to absorb
them easily. Inert growing mediums also eliminate the need
for soil and the plant diseases it can carry. In other hydroponic
systems, plant roots are suspended in a grow channel in which
water and nutrients flow.
Hydroponics is divided into active and passive systems.
Active systems use pumps to circulate a nutrient solution
through the plants’ root tips. This method is preferred by large-
scale growers to cultivate fast-growing crops like lettuce. Passive
systems work without pumps. The plants’ root tips are set in
a nutrient solution or growing medium, and the roots draw
nutrients from the solution or surrounding medium to nourish
the plant. This method is best for slow-growing crops, such as
tomatoes, and is used by hobbyists and small-scale growers.
The following are four common hydroponic gardening techniques:
Ebb and Flow. The nutrient solution is pumped to all plants at the same
time, left in the grow channel for a specific period of time, then pumped
out of the grow channel. This method is similar to the flow of ocean
tides into and out of river basins, harbors, and bays.
Drip Method. The nutrient solution drips slowly into the plant pots,
usually on a timed basis such as 10 minutes every hour. The drip system
is used most often with a growing medium. Tomatoes, peppers, and
cucumbers often are grown using this method.
Nutrient Film Technique (NFT). This method floods the grow channel
with a nutrient solution and then drains it about every 15 minutes. The
root tips are exposed to the nutrient solution while the root tops stay
exposed to air. Most plants grown this way are fed on a frequent timed
cycle. Lettuce and other leafy crops are often grown using this method.
Passive System. This method uses a stationary pool of nutrient solution.
The plants’ root tips dangle in the nutrient solution and pull what they
need from it. The plants’ roots stay mostly exposed to air, giving the
plants access to oxygen. This method is slower, so harvesting takes
longer. Tomatoes, peppers, and cucumbers can be grown using
this method.


GARDENING 29
.Garden Types
Cooler Float Grower
Try this floating system, made
with plastic foam coolers that
cost about $3 each.
Materials Needed
■■ Two clean plastic foam
coolers with tapered sides,
large enough to hold
several liters of water
■■ Heavy-duty trash can liners
or plastic sheeting
■■ Duct tape
■■ Seed-starting trays and seeds (or purchased starter plants) in six
2-by-2-inch compartments. Basil and loose-leaf lettuce (fancy types—not
heading lettuce) work well and are easy to grow in the cooler grower.
■■ Utility knife and scissors
■■ One 3-watt aquarium pump and tubing
■■ T-valve to split the tubing for the two coolers
■■ Air stones (used in fish aquariums to aerate water)
■■ HID (high intensity discharge) garden lamp (optional)
■■ Growing medium (a mixture with a 2-1 ratio of perlite to vermiculite
is suggested)
■■ Nutrient (Contact your local hydroponics supplier for a mixture suitable
for the plants you plan to grow. For plants that do not fruit, such as
basil and lettuce varieties, you will
only need a “vegetative” or
“grow” hydroponic nutrient
solution. Many varieties are
available and all are similar
and suitable for this project.
Mix the nutrient solution
according to the
instructions on
the label.)


30 GARDENING
Garden Types.
How to Make Your Hydroponic System
Because the plastic
foam will gradually per-
mit liquids to seep out,
line the inside of each
cooler with two layers
of strong plastic sheet-
ing, such as a heavy-
duty trash can liner,
secured with duct tape
along the outside rim.
Flip the lids over and, using a
utility knife, cut six spaces on
each lid to accommodate the
plants. Cut the spaces to the
size of the starter plant con-
tainers for a snug fit. Because
the lids are domed, the top
edges of the lid rest several
inches below the rim of the
cooler when the lids are
flipped upside down.
If you are starting from seed, plant the seeds in a loose mixture of
perlite and vermiculite in the seed-starting trays. Feed the seeds with
plain tap water until the plants come up, then switch to a diluted
vegetative growth solution—a three-part powdered mix that is sold as
a package. You usually mix 1/4 teaspoon of calcium nitrate, 1/4 teaspoon
“grow” mix, and 1/8 teaspoon magnesium sulfate with 1 gallon of water
per batch. Another popular source of vegetative nutrient solution
is a concentrated liquid mix that has everything already added to it for
good vegetative growth.


GARDENING 31
.Garden Types
When the young seedlings are ready, separate the cells of the seed-
starting trays, cut off the bottom of each cell with sterilized scissors,
gently shake out the growing medium (it falls right out), and insert the
individual cells into the holes in the cooler lids.
The cells fit snugly into the holes and the plant roots easily dangle into
the nutrient solution. The bottom leaves of the plants should be large
enough to prevent the plants from slipping into the cooler.
Sterilize your
scissors by rinsing
them with a
mixture of 1 part
chlorine bleach and
9 parts water and
then flushing well
with clean water.


32 GARDENING
Garden Types.
Cut a hole in the side
of each cooler near the
top to accommodate
an air tube connected
to an air stone at the
bottom of each cooler.
An aquarium pump
provides constant, gen-
tle, bubbling oxygen.
Split the air line coming out of
the pump and run air tubes to
both coolers. One 3-watt pump
will provide enough oxygen for
two coolers. Both coolers will
easily fit under a 250-watt metal
halide light that is connected to
a timer set for a 12-hour photo-
period. Position the light about
a foot or so from the plants to
make sure they are not exposed
to too much radiant heat.
Most salad greens and lettuce plants go from seed to harvest in just
over a month. If you selectively harvest when the plants start to mature,
pull off enough greens to make a few salads each day for the next few
weeks. Do not wait too long to harvest because overly mature greens can
become bitter. Greens will stay fresh in the refrigerator for about a week.
If you harvest all at once, you will have enough greens for a few mighty
salads. If you have new starts continually going and regularly replace old
plants with new ones, you can always have enough greens for the table.
Reprinted with permission from The Growing Edge magazine, Corvallis, Oregon, published
by New Moon Publishing Inc. The plan was adapted from a system first profiled in
“A Beginner’s Guide to Hawaiian Hydroponics,” which was adapted from the instructional
manual “Hydroponics in Hawaii Using Black Lava Rock: ‘Eze Gro Kit’” by Charles E. Musgrove,
The Growing Edge, Vol. 11, No. 4.


GARDENING 33
.Garden Types
Self-Watering Potted Plant
This clever and simple hydroponic system makes a
good starter project.
Materials Needed
■■ 8-inch plastic pot
■■ 10-inch watering saucer or shallow plastic tray
■■ Starter plant (Coleus works well.)
■■ Growing medium, such as expanded clay or perlite
■■ Nutrient (Contact your local hydroponics supplier
for a mixture suitable for the plants you plan to
grow. For plants that do not fruit, such as basil and
lettuce varieties, you will only need a “vegetative”
or “grow” hydroponic nutrient solution. Many vari-
eties are available and all are similar and suitable
for this project. Mix the nutrient solution according
to the directions on the label.)
How to Make Your Hydroponic System
Fill the plastic pot with growing medi-
um. Gently rinse it with tap water,
allowing the surplus to drain. Set the
pot on the watering saucer. Place a
germinated plant into the pot and
carefully arrange the roots so that
they are distributed through the grow-
ing medium. Pour a small quantity of
the prepared nutrient solution into the
saucer or tray. The plant will absorb the
nutrients via capillary action, in which the
higher pressure zone on one side of the
plant draws a substance from the lower
pressure side in order to equalize the pres-
sure. In this case, the medium in the upper
container wants more nutrient solution as it dries


34 GARDENING
Garden Types.
Water Gardening. The difference between water gardening
and hydroponics is that a water garden mimics a natural area
at or just beyond the edge of a body of water, like a beach.
Think about the edge of a pond or lake you might have visited.
Do you remember how many different kinds of plants were
growing along the water’s edge?
A water garden brings those kinds of plants to your
home, patio, or yard. Indoor water gardens offer a peaceful,
pretty, and different kind of garden for you to enjoy. Outdoor
water gardens bring the same elements to your yard, and also
provide a home and feeding area for wildlife, such as birds,
insects, fish, amphibians, and reptiles.
You can grow a water garden in any container that holds
water without leaking. Plastic and heavy glass bowls make
the best water gardens. Wooden tubs, concrete bowls, or terra
cotta pots that have been sealed with a waterproofing agent
are also suitable. You can grow floating plants, such as water
lilies, or you can add a soil basket and grow plants that require
more support for their roots, such as bamboo or cattails.
out, so the material between the medium and the
nutrient solution serves as a conduit for the transfer
of water and nutrients as needed.
Check the saucer daily to make sure the mix does
not dry out. Never pour the nutrient solution into the
top of the pot; always add the nutrient to the tray or
saucer. It’s better for the roots to be fed from the
bottom rather than the top, and you reduce the risk
of overflow out of the saucer by applying too much
nutrient solution to the top of the plant. By allowing
the nutrient solution to sit in the saucer, the medium
will absorb only what the plant needs. If the saucer
is regularly topped off with nutrient solution, the
plant will always have a reserve to soak up
when necessary.
Reprinted with permission from The Growing Edge magazine,
Corvallis, Oregon, published by New Moon Publishing Inc. This
easy hydroponic system was first featured in “The Growing World
of Hydroponics,” by Rob Smith, in The Growing Edge magazine,
Vol. 11, No. 1.


GARDENING 35
.Garden Types
Make a Water Garden
To build a water garden, you will need
the following supplies:
■■ Waterproof container at least 6 inches
deep for floating plant water garden,
24 inches deep for water gardens that
will contain soil baskets and large plants
■■ Water plants
■■ Soil and soil baskets for large plants
(baskets should be twice as large as
the plant’s root ball)
■■ Chlorine neutralizer (the same kind used for aquariums to counteract
the chlorine added to tap water)
■■ Gravel, clean stones, or decorative marbles for the base of the container
■■ Nutrient solution, if required (Ask the garden center whether any is
required for the plants you choose.)
■■ Recycled gallon milk container or a clean bucket
Try to build your water garden where it will reside permanently, rather
than moving it after it is completed. Once you have decided how large
the water garden will be, and where you will place it, do the following:
Step 1—Wash the container with a gentle dish soap. Avoid detergent or
antibacterial soaps, as they might harm delicate plants.
Step 2—Place any decorative stones, gravel, or marbles in the bottom of
the container.
Step 3—Fill the container with tap water to 2 inches from the top.
Step 4—Add the correct amount of chlorine neutralizer for your container.
For small containers about the diameter of a dinner plate, one drop is
sufficient. For large containers, mix the neutralizer with tap water in an
empty milk jug or bucket according to the instructions per gallon. Fill
your container with the neutralized water.
Step 5, small garden—Add the plants, arranging them however you like.
Add the nutrient solution if required.
Step 5, large garden—Fill soil baskets half full of soil. Place large plant
roots into soil baskets. Cover the roots with soil to approximately
1 inch from the top of the container.
Step 6—Slowly submerge the soil baskets into the water garden,
allowing air bubbles to dissipate as you sink the basket.
Step 7—Add any floating plants.





GARDENING 37
.Growing Fruits and Vegetables
Growing Fruits
and Vegetables
Fruits and vegetables grow on plants, vines, and
trees. Most grow seasonally, but some plants, such
as herbs, will grow year-round in a sunny indoor
location like a windowsill. In warm climates, beets,
carrots, squash, and tomatoes grow year-round.
Cool Season
Fruits and vegetables that grow best during fall and
winter are called cool-season plants. They need cool
temperatures for their crops to ripen. Examples
of cool-season fruits and vegetables are apples,
broccoli, brussels sprouts, cabbage, celery, collards,
grapefruit, kale, lettuce, peas, potatoes, spinach,
and strawberries.
Warm Season
Fruits and vegetables that grow best during spring and
summer are called warm-season plants. They need
warm temperatures for their crops to ripen. Examples
of warm-season fruits and vegetables are beans,
blackberries, blueberries, cantaloupe, carrots, corn,
cucumber, okra, peppers, squash, tomatoes,
and watermelon.
Any Season: Growing Herbs
Herbs have been used for thousands of years to cure illness,
flavor foods, dye cloth, make cosmetics and perfumes, and
freshen the air. You probably have pepper, garlic, and parsley
in your kitchen right now. These and many other herbs are
grown for their flavor, aroma, and beauty. Herbs are fun and
most are easy to grow year-round in a sunny window.
Cool-season fruits
Cool-season
vegetables
Warm-season crops


38 GARDENING
Growing Fruits and Vegetables.
Thyme
Cilantro
Parsley
Basil
Other herbs and growing suggestions are listed here.
• Basil (Ocimum basilicum) will grow to a height of 2 to 3
feet; a dwarf variety does well in containers. Basil needs
moist soil and full sun; an east or south windowsill is best.
• Coriander (Coriandrum sativum), also known as Chinese
parsley or cilantro. This herb (the leaves) and spice (the
seeds) give Mexican and Chinese dishes their oomph. You
can grow coriander right from the seeds in your spice rack!
Coriander grows 12 to 15 inches high. Transplant it outdoors
in the spring alongside a few tomatoes, scallions, and pep-
pers. Full sun and moderate water will sustain coriander
through its early months.
• Lavender (Lavandula) is a woody evergreen shrub grown
for its fragrant oil. It grows to a height of 1 to 3 feet. The oil
is used to make soaps, lotions, perfumes, and air fresheners.
You can use the dried flowers in arts and crafts projects.
Lavender plants need a sunny location, good drainage, and
average soil. Lavender grows best in the ground.
• Parsley (Apiaceae) is an excellent choice for an indoor herb
garden. Mature plants range from 6 to 12 inches in height.
Parsley grows best in moist soil with full sun in winter.
Transplanted to the outdoor garden, parsley needs moderate
shade to continue growing during the hot summer months.
Seeds should be soaked overnight in warm water to help
germination, which can take up to four weeks. It is easiest
to purchase a small parsley plant from a garden center.
• Salvia officinalis is one of more than 60 types of sage
grown by gardeners. It is the most aromatic of the salvias,
growing to a height of 30 inches. Definitely destined for
transplant, salvia adds color and texture to an indoor
herb garden. It needs full sun and regular water to thrive.
• Rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis) is a woody plant
and needs its own container. Whether a climbing or shrub
variety, rosemary is an excellent plant for landscaping. It grows
almost anywhere there is sun. Once established, it can tolerate
drought. Full sun and moderate water will sustain rosemary
until it is moved outdoors in spring.
• Thyme (Thymus vulgaris) is cousin to the mint plant and
makes a wonderful addition to any herb garden. This small,
woody shrub grows to only 4 to 12 inches. Thyme is at
home in a rock garden with a little shade. It is happiest in
its own container when indoors. It needs moderate water
and full winter sun.
Rosemary


GARDENING 39
.Growing Fruits and Vegetables
Tools and Equipment
No matter what kind of garden you choose to grow, you
will use special tools—called implements—to help you
work with your garden. You probably will need a
spade or small shovel, a hoe, a rake, a yardstick,
bamboo or other wooden stakes, and stretchable
garden string. If you do not have these tools, you
can use an old kitchen serving spoon and fork for
digging, and strips of old socks or stockings instead of
string to secure your plants to the supports.
You also might want a pair of garden gloves to help protect
your hands. Thrift stores, hardware stores, and discount garden
centers are good places to find garden implements.
Planning Your Garden
After you have decided what you want to grow, identify which
crops grow on plants and which grow on vines. Sometimes
you can plant crops that need cooler temperatures beneath the
vines or stalks of a taller crop that can tolerate full sun. Or you
may decide to have an ornamental garden.
HOUSE
SIDEWALK
JUNIPER’S BEARD 24"
WHITE
BOLTONIA
60" SMALL
SHRUB SMALL
SHRUB
SMALL
SHRUB
WHITE
BOLTONIA
60"
JUNIPER’S BEARD 24"
SIBERIAN IRIS 36"
SIBERIAN IRIS 36"
SIBERIAN IRIS 36"
ZAGREB
TICKSEED 15"
ZAGREB TICKSEED 15"
CATMINT 15"
CATMINT 15"
Before you plant
your garden,
decide what crops
you want to grow.
(Most tree crops
take two to three
years or more to
produce fruit
and will not be
discussed in
this pamphlet.)


40 GARDENING
Growing Fruits and Vegetables.
Staying Safe While Gardening
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation,
which means “to lessen in force or intensity” and
“to make less severe.” By taking precautions to
manage risk and the possibility of injury, you can
be prepared to anticipate, help prevent, mitigate,
and respond to just about any incident that might
happen while you garden.
Like all outdoor activities, gardening has its
risks. You can start by dressing appropriately for
gardening—for instance, jeans, boots, gloves, hat,
and a long-sleeved shirt for protection. To ward off
sunburn, frequently apply sunscreen with an SPF
of at least 15. You should at least be prepared for
the following.
Minor cuts and scrapes (abrasions). Any sharp
garden tool can cause cuts and scrapes. Treat minor
cuts and scrapes by flushing the area with clean
water for at least five minutes to wash away foreign
matter. Apply triple antibiotic ointment (if the person
has no known allergies or sensitivities to the
medication), then cover with a dry, sterile dressing
and bandage or with an adhesive bandage.
Puncture wounds. Rusty nails, sharp sticks, and
broken glass could cause a puncture wound. These
wounds are difficult to clean and are easily infected.
Help flush out dirt or particles by irrigating the area
with clean, running water for about five minutes.
Use sterilized tweezers to pull out small objects you
can see. Do not try to remove a large, embedded
object. Control the bleeding and stabilize the object
with sterile rolled bandages or gauze pads, then
seek medical attention.
Heat reactions. Help prevent dehydration by staying
well-hydrated anytime you are working outdoors.
Drink plenty of water—don’t wait until you feel


GARDENING 41
.Growing Fruits and Vegetables
thirsty. Avoid heat exhaustion and heatstroke by tak-
ing frequent breaks indoors to cool off. If you start
to feel weak, tired, faint, nauseated, or disoriented,
head inside. If you don’t feel better after resting,
cooling off, and drinking fluids, see a doctor.
Insect bites. The bites of mosquitoes, chiggers, and
no-see-ums are irritating but not usually dangerous.
However, if your area has had cases of West Nile
virus, protect yourself from mosquitoes by using the
right insect repellent when you are gardening. For
protection from ticks, wear long pants tucked into
your boots and a long-sleeved shirt buttoned up to
the collar.
Be careful when digging in areas where spiders
and other biting insects might be lurking. Watch
out for fire ants, which live in loose mounds of dirt.
These bites can usually be treated by washing the
area with soap and water, applying an antiseptic,
and covering with a sterile bandage. For more
relief, take a mild nonaspirin pain reliever and apply
a cold pack to the area. Seek medical attention
immediately if there is trouble breathing or the
pain does not ease.
Anyone who is highly allergic to fire ant bites
or bee or wasp stings can have a life-threatening
reaction called anaphylactic shock, or anaphylaxis.
Symptoms can include swelling of the throat tissues
or tongue that makes breathing difficult or even
impossible. Call 911 for immediate medical assis-
tance. Keep the victim comfortable—usually a
sitting position—until medical help arrives.
People who know they are susceptible to ana-
phylaxis should carry an emergency kit that contains
an injection of epinephrine, a rapidly acting hormone
that reverses the effects of anaphylactic shock.
For more detailed information about first aid,
consult the First Aid merit badge pamphlet.


42 GARDENING
Growing Fruits and Vegetables.
Decide where to grow the garden.
If the garden will grow in the ground, get a piece of
paper and a pencil and map out where you will
plant each crop. Visit the plot of land where your
garden will be located and decide what you need
to do to prepare the ground. You might need to
till the soil and add compost or other materials,
such as fertilizer, topsoil, or mulch, to make
the ground ready for a garden.
If you are planning a container
garden, first make a list of your crops.
Then, decide how many plants you will
grow and how many containers you will
need. Suitable containers for patio gar-
dens include pots made of clay, ceramic,
wood, or plastic. Clean, recycled plastic
containers for milk, soda, and juice also
can be used.
Make sure the container has adequate
drainage (cut a hole in the bottom and cover
the bottom with gravel at least 1 inch deep).
You can plant several plants in larger contain-
ers, so you might need only one or two containers. Finally, fig-
ure out how much soil is needed to fill the containers.
Decide how you will start your crops. You can buy seeds
or young plants at a discount store, garden center, or farmers’
market. Remember that if you are growing from seeds, your
garden will take longer to produce crops. The growing time is
printed on the back of seed packets so you can figure out how
long it will take from planting to harvest.
A good rule to remember is to plant a seed as
deep as the seed is wide. For example, a pumpkin
seed is about 1
⁄2 inch wide, so you would plant it
1
⁄2 inch deep. Beans will be planted at a similar
depth. Smaller seeds, such as pansy, marigold,
and broccoli, need only a very thin layer of soil to
germinate properly.


GARDENING 43
.Growing Fruits and Vegetables
Planting Your Garden
Growing from seed is fun because you can watch the entire life
cycle of a plant. It is best to sprout—germinate—seeds indoors
in small pots or from seed-starting kits. In addition, starting
seeds indoors gives you the chance to see your plants several
times a day. Also, you should be aware of the following
disadvantages to growing directly from seed in the outdoors:
• The soil may be too hard for a young seed to sprout through.
• Rain might wash away the seeds.
• Cold weather might kill young sprouts.
• Animals, bugs, or birds might eat the seeds or young sprouts.
Your garden has a better chance of surviving outdoors
if you plant seedlings that already have roots. Starting seeds
indoors gives your garden a head start when the weather out-
doors is still cold—about four to eight weeks before your
area’s last frost date. (The chart on pages 12–14 shows the
average last frost dates for a number of growing regions in
the United States.)
Plants are ready to set out when they have at least four
leaves and remain standing when you water them. When you
are ready to plant, use the map of your garden to place your
plants in the areas you planned.


44 GARDENING
Growing Fruits and Vegetables.
Nutrition
It is important to stay physically fit. You can do this by eating
healthy foods, maintaining a healthy weight, and staying
physically active. Homegrown vegetables provide a lot of
nutritional value.
According to the U.S. Department of Agriculture, you
should consume more fruits and vegetables than any other
category of food. These foods provide important vitamins
and minerals that your body needs to function properly.
They also provide roughage, or fiber, which is good for your
digestive system.
Growing From Seed
You can start your garden from seed by planting the
seeds in peat pots, seed trays, or small
pots, or in sheets of damp newspaper.
• If you are using soil, fill containers with
soil to within 1/2 inch of the top. Place
one or two seeds in each container (larger
containers can handle more seeds). Lightly
cover the seeds with more soil.
• If you are using peat capsules, place two
seeds in the circle atop each capsule, then
place the capsule in a waterproof tray.
• If you are using newspaper, layer six or
eight single sheets of newspaper in the bottom
of a 9-by-13-inch glass baking dish. Place the
seeds about an inch apart on the top layer of
newspaper. Cover the paper with two additional
single sheets of paper.
• After the seeds have been planted, use a mist
sprayer to dampen the soil. A garden hose, sink
sprayer, or watering can provides too much water
pressure and will wash away small seeds.
• Place the seeds in a warm, well-lighted location.
• Keep the soil moist. Most seeds will sprout within
seven to 10 days.


GARDENING 45
.Growing Fruits and Vegetables
Show What You Grow
Exhibiting what you grow is reward-
ing. You can show others how hard
you worked and what you learned.
You might find garden contests at
county and state fairs, county exten-
sion services, farmers’ markets, and
local garden clubs. Read the garden
section in your local newspaper to
find out about garden shows. Most shows are open to the public; many
allow hobbyist gardeners to enter their plants or crops in the show.
Every gardening show or contest has rules. You need to have a copy of
the rules for each exhibit you prepare. These steps will help you prepare
your produce for a show. After you have picked your produce:
1. Clean the produce using water and a soft brush.
2. Dry each item completely using a soft cloth or paper towel.
3. Wrap each item by itself in soft paper towels.
4. Place a 1-inch layer of packing material on the bottom of your
packing box. (Plastic foam “peanuts,” bubble wrap, and shredded
paper work best.)
5. Place the produce on the first layer of packing material so that
1 to 2 inches of space buffers each item.
6. Fill in all the spaces with more packing material.
7. Place another inch or two of packing material on top of the produce.
8. Repeat the packing process until the box is full. (Leave enough
space to add a layer of packing on top to help protect the last
layer of produce.)
If you are showing a flowering plant or shrub:
1. Gently wash the leaves of the plant with water.
2. Dry each leaf carefully with a soft, lint-free cloth (clean cotton
diapers or old T-shirts work well). Do not touch the flowers or buds
except to remove harmful insects; the oils on your skin might cause
the flower to turn brown or wilt.
3. Wrap the container in a leakproof layer of foil or decorative plastic
so that it will not leak water and soil during the exhibition.


46 GARDENING
Growing Fruits and Vegetables.
Anatomy of MyPlate*
The U.S. Department of Agriculture created MyPlate to help
you make better food choices and remind you to eat health-
fully. Here’s how.
Balance your calories by enjoying your food, eating less, and
avoiding oversized portions.
Build a healthy plate by making half your plate fruits and
vegetables. Make at least half your grains whole grains.
Cut back on foods high in solid fats, added sugars, and salt.
Read and compare food labels. Avoid the extra calories by
drinking water instead of sugary drinks and fat-free or low-fat
milk instead of whole milk.
Consume the right amount of calories for your body and
activity level. Using the tools found at myplate.gov can help
you make that determination.
*This information comes from the U.S. Department of Agriculture.
Nutritional Value
What vitamins and minerals do fruits and
vegetables provide? Here is a general guide.
Vitamin A
Tomatoes; bananas; broccoli; yellow melons
and squashes, including pumpkins; yellow,
green, and red peppers; citrus fruits; sweet
potatoes; zucchini; green onions; mush-
rooms; and carrots
Vitamin C
Citrus fruits; dark green leafy vegetables
such as spinach, collards, and kale;
tomatoes; melons; peppers; cabbage;
guava; strawberries; pineapples; potatoes;
kiwi; and zucchini
Iron
Dark green leafy vegetables such as
spinach, collards, and kale; dried fruits;
and legumes (beans, peanuts)
Calcium
Broccoli; collards; kale; kidney, navy, and
garbanzo beans; spinach; sunflower seeds;
and dried figs
For the latest
information about
USDA’s nutrition
guidelines, with
your parent or
guardian’s
permission, go to
myplate.gov/.


GARDENING 47
.Growing Fruits and Vegetables
Storage
There are many reasons to store produce after it has been
harvested. The most obvious reason is so that you can eat the
food later in the year, after its growing season. The two most
common ways to store produce are in bins and by preserving.
BINS
Bin storage is good for onions, pumpkins, squash, and sweet
potatoes. Basements, a cool pantry, or a closed crawl space
beneath a house or other building are all good places for a veg-
etable storage bin. If space is tight, you can place a small, flat
bin beneath a bed, as long as the space is well-ventilated and
away from heating ducts. In rural areas, you can buy wooden
bins at hardware, garden, or feed stores. In suburban or urban
areas, you can get discarded bins from a grocery store or pro-
duce stand, or simply use a sturdy laundry basket (ask first).
PRESERVING
Preserving means to prepare vegetables or fruit for storage by
cooking or freezing. Cooked produce is usually stored in cans
or jars. Canning produce is a lot of work and can be dangerous,
but freezing produce can be done easily. If you would like to
store your produce, contact your local extension service to get
instructions. Always ask an adult to help you.
Pack the produce loosely in bins so that air can circulate. Cover your produce with
burlap or other material that will allow airflow.





GARDENING 49
.Growing Ornamental Plants and Grasses
Growing Ornamental
Plants and Grasses
Ornamental means decorative, like an ornament on a Christmas
tree. Ornamental trees, plants, and grasses are plants we grow
because we like the way they look.
Trees
We plant trees for two reasons: food and
landscaping. Trees come in all shapes and sizes, but
there are only three kinds of trees: coniferous, ever-
green, and deciduous.
Coniferous
Coniferous trees produce cones containing seeds.
Examples are pine, cedar, and fir trees.
Evergreen
Evergreen trees keep their green leaves year-round.
Examples are magnolia, palm, and juniper trees.


50 GARDENING
Growing Ornamental Plants and Grasses.
Deciduous
Deciduous trees lose all of their leaves at one time each year,
usually in the fall or early winter. Examples are dogwood, oak,
and pecan trees.
Shrubs, Vines, and Ground Covers
Shrubs are smaller than trees, but larger and
stronger than flowers or vegetables. Vines are
plants that grow with leaves on a stem that is long
and thin, like string. Some vines have soft green
stems. Other vines have tough, wood stems. Vines
can grow on the ground, up a tree or fence, or on
a trellis. Ground covers grow low to the ground.
Some grow like vines and others grow like grass.
You do not mow ornamental ground covers. Some
examples of ornamental ground
covers include some varieties of sedum, thyme,
lily turf, and Lenten rose.
For growing ornamentals, follow the germination
techniques as described in the previous chapter,
“Growing Fruits and Vegetables.”


GARDENING 51
Flowers
We grow flowers because they add
color and beauty to our landscapes
and homes. Flowers have been used
to celebrate special events for thousands
of years. They also are used to produce
perfumes, fabric dyes, and art. Like
trees and shrubs, flowers come in
hundreds of shapes and sizes.
But there are only two kinds
of flowers: annual and perennial.
Annuals
Annual flowers grow for one season
and then die. They often provide bright
flowers that grow very quickly during
warm weather. Thus, annuals grow
and bloom during spring, summer, or
fall and die after the first frost. New
ones must be planted—either from
seed or young plants—every year.
Some examples are impatiens, periwin-
kles, marigolds, zinnias, and pansies. The
chart at the end of this chapter is a help-
ful tool for planting garden annuals.
Perennials
Perennial flowers and plants come back
year after year without replanting. They
are like deciduous trees because they
lose their leaves or die back when the
weather turns cool. When the weather
warms up, perennials grow back again,
sometimes larger and prettier than in
the prior year. They often bloom later
in the warm season than annuals, but
their flowers are usually larger and more
impressive. Some examples are daisies,
daylilies, hostas, and black-eyed susans.
Big-leaf
periwinkle
Petunia
Dahlia


52 GARDENING
Growing Ornamental Plants and Grasses.
Planting and culture of selected garden annuals
Plant When to Plant Seed Exposure
Ageratum After last frost Semishade or
full sun
Baby’s breath Early spring or in summer Sun
Balsam After last frost Sun
Calendula Early spring or late fall Shade or sun
Calliopsis After last frost Shade or sun
Candytuft Early spring or late fall Shade or sun
China aster After last frost Shade or sun
Cockscomb After last frost Shade or sun
Coleus Sow indoors anytime;
outdoors after last frost
Sun or
partial shade
Cornflower Early spring Partial shade
Cosmos After last frost Sun
Dahlia After last frost Sun
Forget-me-not Spring or summer Partial shade
Four-o’clock After last frost Sun
Gaillardia Early spring through
summer; shade in summer
Sun
Globe amaranth Early spring Sun
Impatiens Indoors anytime; set out
after last frost
Partial shade or
deep shade
Larkspur Late fall in South;
early spring in North
Sun
Lupine Early spring or late fall Sun
Marigold After last frost Sun


GARDENING 53
.Growing Ornamental Plants and Grasses
Germination
Time
(in days)
Plant
Spacing
(in inches)
Remarks
5 10 to 12 Pinch tops of plants to encourage branching;
remove dead flowers.
10 10 to 12 Make successive sowings for prolonged
blooming period; shade summer plantings.
10 12 to 14
10 8 to 10
8 10 to 14
20 8 to 12
8 10 to 12 For best plants start early, grow in cold
frame; make successive sowings for
prolonged bloom.
10 10 to 12
10 10 to 12
5 12 to 14
5 10 to 12
5 12 to 14 For maximum bloom, sow several weeks
before other annuals.
10 10 to 12
5 12 to 14 Store roots; plant next year.
20 10 to 12
15 10 to 12
15 10 to 12
20 6 to 8 Difficult to transplant; grow in peat pots.
20 6 to 8 Soak seed before planting; guard against
damping-off (disease).
5 10 to 14 High fertility delays bloom.


54 GARDENING
Growing Ornamental Plants and Grasses.
Plant When to Plant Seed Exposure
Morning glory After last frost Sun
Nasturtium After last frost Sun
Pansy Spring or summer;
shade in summer
Sun or shade
Petunia Late fall in South Sun
Phlox Early spring Sun
Pink Early spring through
summer; shade in summer
Sun
Poppy Early spring through
summer; shade in summer
Sun
Portulaca After last frost or in late fall Sun
Rudbeckia Spring or summer;
shade in summer
Sun or
partial shade
Salpiglossis Early spring Sun
Scabiosa Spring or summer;
shade in summer
Sun
Scarlet sage Spring or summer;
shade in summer
Sun
Snapdragon Spring or late fall Sun
Spider plant Early spring; spring or fall Sun
Strawflower Early spring Sun
Summer cypress Early spring Sun
Sunflower After last frost Sun
Sweet alyssum Early spring Sun
Sweet pea Early spring or late summer
through late fall
Sun
Verbena After last frost Sun
Vinca After last frost Sun
Zinnia After last frost Sun


GARDENING 55
.Growing Ornamental Plants and Grasses
Germination
Time
(in days)
Plant
Spacing
(in inches)
Remarks
5 24 to 36 Reseeds itself.
8 8 to 12 For best flowers, grow in soil of low fertility.
10 6 to 8 Does best in cool season.
10 12 to 14 Start indoors early in spring; keep cool.
10 6 to 8 Make successive plantings for prolonged bloom.
5 8 to 12 Start indoors early in spring; keep cool;
remove dead flowers.
10 6 to 10 Difficult to transplant; start in peat pots;
make successive plantings.
10 10 to 12
20 10 to 14 Perennial grown as an annual; blooms first year.
15 10 to 12 Needs supports; avoid cold, heavy soil.
10 12 to 14 Remove old flowers.
15 8 to 12
15 6 to 10 Start cool; pinch tips to encourage branching.
10 12 to 14 Reseeds freely; pinch to keep plant short;
water and fertilize freely.
5 10 to 12
15 18 to 24
5 12 to 14
5 10 to 12 Damps off easily; sow in hills; do not thin.
15 6 to 8 Select heat-resistant types.
20 18 to 24 Pinch tips often to encourage branching.
15 10 to 12 Avoid overwatering.
5 8 to 12 Thin after plants begin to bloom; remove
poor-flowering plants.


56 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden
Gardens sometimes have unwelcome visitors. You know the
kind—the ones that eat or destroy plants and leave you with
nothing to show for your hard work. You will need to learn
how to identify and correct problems in your garden. But the
best way to fix problems in your garden is to prevent them
in the first place. The old saying, “An ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure,” works for garden pests.
Preventive Measures
Creating a place that is unfriendly to garden pests—
both insects and disease—will save you a lot of work
later. The following are some ways to help prevent and
discourage garden pests:
1. Use clean, well-drained soil.
2. Grow plants that are well-suited or native to your
growing region.
3. Control weeds and grass in your garden.
4. Buy seeds and plants that are free of disease or
insect damage.
5. Plant strong-smelling plants such as marigolds
around your garden to discourage unwanted bugs,
squirrels, and deer.
6. After the growing season, recycle old plants into the
compost bin.
7. Destroy or properly dispose of diseased plants.
8. Do not use chemicals that will eliminate the “good” bugs in
your garden.
When you are working on requirement 7, it is a good time
to seek out experts to answer questions you may have about
things like organic controls popular in your area.


GARDENING 57
.Nurturing Your Garden
Be On the Lookout
Even if you practice all the preventive measures, sometimes
a pest will still find its way into your garden. You will need
to know what to look for and how to fix pest problems in
your garden.
Disease
Diseases in plants are a lot like diseases in people. Sometimes
they are viral, like the chicken pox. Sometimes they are fungal,
Create Your Own Wildlife Haven
If you enjoy watching wildlife, think about creating a garden friendly for the
wildlife in your own backyard. Whether your garden is located on
the balcony of a high-rise apartment or at a single-family home, follow
these tips from the National Wildlife Federation to help attract wildlife.
• Provide food by planting trees, shrubs, and other foliage that produce
nuts, berries, seeds, pollen, and nectar. Adding feeders and other food
sources makes a garden even more irresistible for wildlife.
• Supply water for drinking, bathing, and reproduction. A birdbath,
portable fountain, or small pond are just several ways to provide
a clean water source for birds, butterflies, and other creatures.
• Create cover such as native plants, birdhouses (for the particular
species you want to attract), and toad houses so that wildlife will
have a safe haven from predators, people, and foul weather.
• Give wildlife a place to raise their young, such as a dense shrub,
nesting box, or dead tree.
• Let your garden go green. You can do this by reducing lawn areas (that
often require chemicals and lots of watering and maintenance), using
mulch in garden beds, and replacing exotic plants with native ones.
Bees, birds, butterflies, bats, and many flying insects have
something in common: They are all pollinators, vital for
flowering plants and the production of many of the fruits and
vegetables we all enjoy. In recent years, scientists have been
concerned about the declining populations of pollinators,
very likely caused by habitat loss and devastation. What can
you do? Take care in using pesticides and herbicides, and make your
garden friendly for pollinators with plants and trees that attract them.


58 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
“Supercharged” Fruits and Vegetables
What if farmers could grow fields of potatoes, corn, and strawberries
that could protect themselves from frost, disease, and insect pests?
What if the rice you eat at dinner could protect you against blindness
and reduce the risk of cancer? “Supercharged” fruits and vegetables
like these are the promise of a scientific field of study called agricul-
tural biotechnology.
Scientists in this field use techniques such as genetic engineering
to create, improve, or modify plants, animals, and microorganisms,
according to the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA). Genetic
engineering is the process of “cutting and pasting” genes within one
species or from one species to another. So, for example, a gene that
protects a plant against early frosts can be inserted into strawber-
ries; or a gene that increases crop yield can be added to corn, so
that a farmer produces a bigger crop than usual.
Some “supercharged” fruits and vegetables already exist and
have been tested and approved by the USDA’s Animal and Plant
Health Inspection Service. A few examples include insect-resistant
potatoes, corn, and cotton, and longer-lasting tomatoes. And experi-
ments continue, so that one day wheat will grow in fields that are now
unfavorable to the crop and bananas will contain edible vaccines.


GARDENING 59
.Nurturing Your Garden
Sometimes, plants
become diseased
because of
environmental
problems:
pollution and too
much or too little
sun, nutrients,
or water.
like athlete’s foot. And sometimes they are bacterial, like a
cavity in a tooth. Most stem, leaf, flower, and fruit diseases
are caused by viruses, bacteria, and fungi. Most root or soil-
borne diseases are caused by fungi.
Bacterial diseases are caused by single-celled organisms
that feed on plants to survive. The host plant becomes diseased
because the bacteria take nutrients from and cause damage to
the plant’s structure. You can control bacterial diseases with
bacterial soaps made specifically for the garden. These soaps
kill the harmful bacteria without harming beneficial insects.
Fungal diseases are caused by multicelled, threadlike
organisms called fungi. Fungi grow and produce spores, or
new cells, that spread with wind, insects, or water. Fungal
infections damage the plant structure. Once weakened by
fungal infection, a plant becomes vulnerable to other diseases.
To prevent fungal disease from infecting your plants, pick off
dead or dying leaves and use clean garden tools. Planting
fungus-resistant plants and using antifungal sprays and soaps
also help control disease.
Many types of plants have varieties that are resistant to
fungus. Check the seed packet or the identification stake that
comes with prestarted plants in the garden center. A fungus-
resistant plant will be listed as “resistant to powdery mildew”
or “resistant to gray mold.”
Viral diseases spread among plants the same way they
spread among humans. Plants infected with viral diseases grow
deformed leaves, flowers, and produce, and might change color.
Viral diseases are difficult to control. In most cases, the affected
plant must be removed from the garden and destroyed.
What to Do With Infected Plants
If you have to remove a diseased plant from your
garden, you should destroy it. This prevents the
disease from spreading to other plants. You can
dispose of infected plants by burning them, but
that might require a local permit. An easier and
safer method of disposal is to place the affected
plant in a plastic garbage bag, seal it, and put the
first bag into a second plastic bag. Seal the sec-
ond bag and place it into the household waste bin
for the waste company to remove.


Garden Pests
Here are some common pesky garden critters
that need to be controlled.
• Aphids
• Cabbage maggots
• Caterpillars
• Colorado
potato beetles
• Cutworms
• Flea beetles
• Japanese beetles
• Mealybugs
• Mexican
bean beetles
• Scale insects
• Tarnished
plant bugs
Nurturing Your Garden.
The most common environmentally based diseases are
chlorosis and soil salinity. Chlorosis is caused by a lack of iron
in the soil. Soil salinity results when overwatering and overfertil-
izing leave too much salt in the soil. Both problems can be cor-
rected with readily available organic or synthetic soil additives.
IN ROOTS
Root diseases are the hardest kind of
plant problems to detect and correct.
The plant might wilt or die completely,
without an obvious cause. When a plant
becomes sick or dies from root disease,
it is usually caused by water mold fungi
that are too small to see with your eyes,
or by immature insects, called grubs
or larvae.
If you suspect root disease, soak
the area with diluted dish soap. (Mix 1
tablespoon of dish soap with 1 gallon
of water, adding the soap to the water
to reduce foaming.) Grubs will surface
within a few minutes. You can see grubs
with your eyes. If you do not see any
grubs, then a fungal infection is likely
the cause. Gently dig an inch or two
deep around the base
of the affected plant.
If there are no signs
of grubs, remove the
affected plant from your
garden and destroy it.
Pepper plant infested with southern
root-knot nematode
Croton caterpillar


GARDENING 61
.Nurturing Your Garden
ON LEAVES
Problems on leaves are easier to see, because of the physical
evidence: a chewed leaf, spider web, or bug droppings.
Sometimes yellow leaves are the only symptom, but yellow
leaves are usually caused by a root disease, not a leaf disease.
The safest way to control harmful insects in your
garden is to pick them off (using gloves) and destroy
them. You can use insecticidal soaps or sprays, but they
often kill the good bugs as well. Yellow leaves might
indicate what is called iron chlorosis. You can easily
repair this problem by adding iron to the soil.
Your local garden center or extension service will
be able to help you diagnose plant diseases. Follow
these steps to obtain a sample of the problem:
Step 1—Using a resealable plastic bag, capture the
sample fresh from your garden.
Step 2—Open the bag and gently place it around an
infected leaf or group of leaves.
Step 3—Try to catch at least one insect, if possible.
Step 4—Seal the bag on both sides of the stem, then
clip the stem.
Step 5—Push the stem into the bag.
Step 6—Seal the bag completely.
Step 7—Take the sample to your garden center or
extension service as soon as possible so the sample
remains fresh.
Step 8—Follow the instructions provided by the
agricultural professional.
ON VEGETABLES OR FRUITS
Like leaf problems, disease or insect damage on produce
is easy to see. The vegetable or fruit will have holes or
soft spots on its skin. It is best to
remove the damaged produce
from the plant and dispose
of it. Do not eat fruits or
vegetables that have
obvious insect damage.


62 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
Help Your Garden Grow
Many people think that all bugs are harmful, but this is not
true. Some bugs are fun, and some bugs are very important
members of our garden families. Good bugs pollinate our gar-
dens and eat the bugs we do not want there. Unwanted bugs
eat, damage, or destroy garden plants. Diseases also attack the
plants. It is important to know how to control all types of pests
in your garden.
Organic Controls
Organic controls are natural methods of garden management
that do not harm the environment. Many inorganic controls
contain toxic chemicals that kill beneficial insects, birds, and
other wildlife. They also can leave harmful chemicals on the
food we eat. By using organic garden practices, such as soil
building, composting, plant care, and preventive pest control,
you can create a garden that needs little “outside” help.
Organic Controls
The benefits of using organic controls include
the following:
• Cultural controls reduce the number of pests by
keeping the plants healthy and the garden clean.
• Biological controls reduce the number of pests by
using living creatures, such as birds, beneficial
bugs, and microbial sprays, to control insects and
plant diseases.
• Physical controls keep pests away from your
garden by using barriers or by removing them
by hand.
• Organic chemical controls use chemicals that occur
naturally in plants or minerals. These chemicals
break down more quickly and have fewer toxic
effects on the environment. They are used by
organic gardeners only as a last resort.


GARDENING 63
.Nurturing Your Garden
BENEFICIAL BUGS
One of the easiest ways to control pests in your garden is to
let nature take its course. As you know, within the food chain
small creatures fall prey to large creatures. The same principle
can be applied to your garden. Let the good bugs eat the bad
bugs and you won’t have to spend time picking and squashing
the bad bugs. The following list describes beneficial—good—
bugs that you can invite into your garden to help control
insect damage.
• Nematodes are little wormlike parasites that feed on
grubs and bad worms in the soil, such as Japanese beetle
grubs, root weevils, wood-boring caterpillars, armyworms,
and billbugs.
• Green lacewings produce the hungriest babies in the bug
world. Their larvae have huge appetites for aphids, other
small insects, insect eggs, and spider mites.
• Parasitic wasps, like the tiphia wasps, will not bother
people or pets, but they do destroy garden pests. They
reproduce by laying eggs in a host insect or insect egg,
generally those of aphids, whiteflies, cabbage loopers, and
hornworms. The larvae then eat the host, thereby removing
the pest from your garden.
Japanese beetle
grubs
Nematodes


64 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
• Syrphid fly larvae eat aphids, mealybugs, and small
insects like gnats. Adults are often called hover flies
because they hover over nectar-producing flowers.
They do not sting. Sometimes, they are large enough
to be confused with a small hummingbird.
• Red ladybugs, or lady beetles, eat mealybugs, aphids,
and young scale insects. Orange lady beetles, however,
are destructive to many garden flowers.
• Ground beetles, sometimes called black beetles, eat
dirt bugs—the kinds of insects and pests that make
their homes in your flowerbeds, lawn, and patio con-
tainers. Ground beetles eat cutworms, root maggots,
slugs, and snails.
• Assassin bugs eat flies, mosquitoes, beetles, and large
caterpillars. They have horns. They bite. They squeak.
They hatch in June. They are not very “nice” bugs, but
they eat the bad guys. They are aptly named.
• Tachnid flies love Queen Anne’s lace, dill, and parsley.
They also will munch on most any bad caterpillar, as
well as gypsy moth larvae.
• Rove beetles are those little black or brown bugs that
skittle away when you clear away mulch or pine straw
to plant an annual or yank a weed. They look like little
scorpions because they keep their abdomens pointed
upward while they move. Rove beetles eat aphids, spring-
tails, mites, slugs, snails, fly eggs, and maggots. They are
also little compost machines, eating and breaking down
decaying organic material.
Assassin bug
The red ladybug
makes a good
garden resident.


GARDENING 65
Attract Butterflies to
Your Garden
Besides being pretty and fun to watch, butterflies
help pollinate your garden. You can attract butter-
flies by growing plants and flowers that contain a lot
of nectar. Some nectarous plants are azalea, black-eyed
susan, catnip, daisy, goldenrod, lilac, marigold,
honeysuckle, zinnia, and, of course, butterfly bush.
If you grow plants on which butterfly larvae
(caterpillars) feed, called larval plants, butterflies will take
up residence in your garden. Some larval plants are aster,
clover, dill, fennel, milkweed, nasturtium, parsley,
snapdragon, sorrel, verbena, and violet. You will
notice leaf damage where the larvae have fed, but
the damage is temporary and usually minor.
Different butterflies feed on different plants
during the larval stage. For example, monarch butterflies feed on
milkweed, swallowtail butterflies feed on parsley, and American
copper butterflies feed on sorrel. By planting a variety of larval plants,
you can increase the variety of butterflies in your garden.
Baltimore butterfly
Lastly, do not forget one of the best garden friends of all, the
toad. Toads eat just about all bugs, good or bad. In general, toads
are welcome in gardens because most of them are harmless and
there usually are more bad
bugs than good bugs in any
garden. You can encourage a
toad to move into your garden
by providing it a home.
Toad houses are garden
accents that look like upside-
down clay pots with little
doors. Some even have
windows and chimneys.
You can make one by
burying a clay pot halfway,
on its side, so there is room
enough for a toad to move
into the house.


66 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
COMPANION PLANTING
Companions are friends. Friends help each other. Certain kinds
of plants can help each other. Planting marigolds, garlic, or
other herbs is a common way to control garden pests. Com-
panion plants can protect crops by producing an odor that
repels pests. Many kinds of companion plants, such as dill,
are nurseries for larvae of beneficial insects. (Butterflies lay
eggs in dill, then the larvae eat the eggs. Talk about a
protein-rich breakfast!)
Some plants distract deer, squirrels, and other furry
friends who use flowerbeds and gardens as a walk-through
restaurant. Deer would rather eat soybeans and buckwheat
than azaleas and roses. Marigolds contain pyrethrin, which is
the chemical most commercial flea sprays use to ward off the
pet-prone pests. Pyrethrin is one of the few chemicals permitted
in organic gardens. Squirrels, mice, and other vermin dislike
the chemical as much as they do fleas.
Come Play in My Garden
These plants will attract beneficial
garden creatures.
Angelica Marigold
Bee balm Parsley
Buckwheat Peony
Calendula Peppermint
Candytuft Queen Anne’s lace
Chinese cabbage Rudbeckia
Cilantro Spearmint
Clover Sunflower
Daisy Sweet alyssum
Dill Thyme
Evening primrose Valerian
Fennel Yarrow


GARDENING 67
.Nurturing Your Garden
INSECTICIDAL SOAPS AND WASHES
Bugs sometimes leave behind droppings, which attract more
bugs. One way of controlling unwelcome bugs in your garden
is to use a natural insect soap. And don’t forget: Spiders build
webs that catch dirt and insects, too.
Insecticidal soaps are specially made solutions of fatty
acids that kill insects like aphids, mites, and whiteflies. The
soap paralyzes the insect, which will then die of starvation.
It must be applied every two to three days during an infestation.
You can buy prepared insecticidal soaps, but many organic
gardeners use a mixture of 1 to 3 tablespoons of gentle dish-
washing soap (not detergent; read the label to be sure) per
gallon of water in their garden sprayer.
Inorganic Controls
The most important thing to remember about inorganic, or
synthetic, pest controls is that they are dangerous and toxic.
The poisons they contain are harmful to your family, your
pets, good bugs, wildlife, and the water supply. When used
incorrectly, they can affect streams, rivers, ponds, and lakes.
Always ask an adult to help you correctly and safely use
pesticides, fungicides, and fertilizers. Start by reading the
label on the container or package and closely following the
manufacturer’s instructions.
For example, caterpillars are not good for a vegetable
garden, but the butterflies they become are helpful for a flower
garden. If you kill the caterpillars, you are killing the butterflies.
Before using an inorganic control, you might consider compan-
ion planting dill or milkweed to give the caterpillars something
to munch on instead of your vegetables.
Rank and Smelly Sulfur
Farmers have been using sulfur for hundreds—perhaps thousands—
of years to repel garden problems. It decreases the pH of alkaline soils,
which repels some pests, including fungi and mites. Snakes are particu-
larly repelled by its odor. Sulfur might harm beneficial bugs, so use it as
a last resort to kill fungal diseases, and under close adult supervision.


68 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
PESTICIDES
Pesticides, also called insecticides, are chemical mixtures that
kill bugs. Properly used, they provide quick, effective ways to
control insects and disease in your garden. Improperly used,
they can make you very sick.
Each pesticide is required by federal law to contain a label
that lists the diseases or insects for which it should be used,
the plants on which it should be used, the ingredients it
contains, and safety precautions. Many states further regulate
the use of some pesticides. It is illegal to apply pesticide to a
plant or pest not listed on the label.
When no other means of pest control has worked, you
may choose to use a synthetic pesticide as a temporary means
to control a serious infestation. A healthy natural environment
is a balanced system. A diverse garden contains the plants
and natural controls that should maintain this balance. When
it does not, pests invade and damage begins. Here are some
commonly used pesticides.
Azadirachtin. Used for insect control and some fungal
diseases like black spot and powdery mildew.
Propoxur. Used in earwig baits and wasp spray, but unsafe for
use on edible plants, fruits, and vegetables.
Bacillus thuringiensis (called Bt). Paralyzes and disintegrates
the stomachs of the insects it destroys. It is poisonous to
caterpillars, mosquitoes, and some beetles.
Contact dusts. Powders that cling to the outside of plants and
typically suffocate insects that come into contact with it. Boric
acid and diatomaceous earth are the most commonly
used dusts. All are harmful if inhaled.
Diazinon. The only chemical
control for soil pests in gardens.
Unfortunately, this chemical also kills
lightning bug larvae, bees, and birds.
Use it sparingly, if at all.
Always carefully
read the label on
all pesticides,
fertilizers, and
other treatments.
The label is the
law. Follow the
manufacturer’s
instructions,
and use these
chemicals only
under close
adult supervision.


GARDENING 69
.Nurturing Your Garden
Fungicides. These are dusted or
sprayed onto foliage to kill or prevent
fungal diseases. Some fungal diseases
include powdery mildew, rust, black
spot, leaf spots, and azalea petal blight.
Ingredients of fungicides include
captan, triadimefon, triforine, calcium
polysulfide, sulfur, and chlorothalonil.
Malathion. A broad spectrum pesticide
commonly used on vegetable and
ornamental plants. It is toxic to bees.
Oil sprays. These smother insects that
come into contact with them. They
are helpful for controlling aphids, scale
insects, and mites. Use carefully on
tender young leaves and flowers, as the
oils can burn the tissues.
Pyrethrins. Natural insecticides
derived from the Pyrethrum daisy.
Marigolds also contain pyrethrins. In
sunny areas, pyrethrins break down in a few hours. They are
the main ingredient of most flea sprays, powders, and collars.
They are also effective against flying insects.
Rotenone. An insecticide used to control chewing insects on
vegetables. It is highly toxic to fish.
Carbaryl. Commonly used in vegetable gardens to thwart
chewing insects. It is not effective against sucking insects,
and often destroys their natural predators. It is highly toxic
to earthworms and honey bees.
Systemic pesticides. Absorbed by plant roots or leaves and
are effective on insects that eat either. Systemic pesticides are
not safe for use on edible plants, fruits, and vegetables.
Avoid inhaling
chemicals—doing
so can damage
your airway and
lungs, too.


70 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
A chemical burn might not be immediately noticeable.
However, as long as the dry chemical is on the skin, it will
continue to burn. Quickly brush off as much of the chemical
as possible using a gloved hand. Dilute the exposure by
continuously flushing the area with water for at least 15 to 20
minutes and seek medical attention. For more information
about chemical burns, see the First Aid merit badge pamphlet.
Garden Chemicals: Think Safety
• Read the label and follow the manufacturer’s instructions.
• Use pesticides, fungicides, and fertilizers only under close
adult supervision.
• Keep all pesticides, fungicides, and fertilizers in original containers.
• Never combine pesticides, fungicides, or fertilizers.
• Store chemicals tightly closed, away from food, and out of the reach
of children and pets.
• Wear protective gloves, clothing, an air mask, and safety glasses
when preparing and applying chemicals.
• Wash your clothing, skin, containers, and sprayers thoroughly after
you have finished.
• Stay out of treated areas until the spray is dry or the dust has settled.
Keep pets and small children out of the area.


GARDENING 71
.Nurturing Your Garden
Feeding Your Garden
Like you, your garden needs food
to grow strong and healthy. Food
for your garden is called fertilizer,
which can be dry or liquid.
Dry fertilizers come in pellets,
tablets, stakes, or powders that you
spread by hand or using a mechani-
cal spreader (handheld or pushed).
They are usually time-released,
meaning that they release a little bit
of their nutrients with each water-
ing or rain shower. It is important
to spread dry fertilizer lightly and
evenly, or you could harm the
plants you are trying to feed.
Dry fertilizers work best for large
applications, such as trees,
a yard, or a large garden or farm.
Liquid fertilizers are mixed with water and are poured
or sprayed onto foliage or around the plant’s base. Liquid
fertilizers provide the plant with quick and easy-to-absorb
nutrients. Because they are diluted, there is little chance
of harming tender foliage. Liquid fertilizers work well for
container plants, water gardens, and small garden plots.
Dry and liquid fertilizers include the following:
• Complete fertilizers contain all of the primary nutrients:
nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), and potassium (K). These
nutrients are described later in this section.
• Special-purpose fertilizers contain nutrients for a particular
kind of plant. You might see fertilizers labeled “African violet
food” or “camellia food,” specially mixed with the nutrients
these plants need most. Special-purpose fertilizers also can
contain one or two of the primary nutrients. Simple fertilizers
contain only one of the primary nutrients.
• Organic fertilizers, made from the decayed remains of
living organisms, include blood meal, manures, composted
yard waste, organic humus, and worm castings.
Just like pesticides
and fungicides,
inorganic and
synthetic fertilizers
are toxic and
dangerous, and
require special
handling. You
should observe
the same safety
precautions with
synthetic fertilizers.
Hydrangea


72 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
WHAT DO THE NUMBERS MEAN?
Fertilizers are complex mixtures of the different nutrients
plants use. There are many kinds of fertilizers for many kinds
of gardening. All fertilizers have at least one thing in common:
the number system used to measure the nutrients in the product.
The higher the number, the more nutrient in the fertilizer.
• The first number measures nitrogen (N).
Nitrogen helps plants grow lots of healthy foli-
age. It is also the nutrient that all plants need to
survive. A plant with a nitrogen deficiency might
have stunted growth, yellow leaves, or an overall
light green color when it should be dark green.
• The second number measures phosphorus (P).
Phosphorus helps plants, especially lawns,
develop strong root systems.
• The third number measures potassium (K).
Potassium is the energy booster that helps annual
and perennial plants produce a lot of flowers or
vegetables. Along with nitrogen, potassium helps
make grass and plants a deep green color.
For example, take a mixture of 20-20-20. This
fertilizer contains 20 percent of each primary
nutrient. It is called an all-purpose fertilizer
because it provides equal amounts of all primary
nutrients. The types of plants and soil you have
will help you determine which fertilizer to use.
ORGANIC AND HOMEMADE FERTILIZERS
Many gardeners prefer to make their own fertiliz-
ers. Organic and homemade fertilizers are derived
from natural things like decaying plants, food, and
earthworm castings. Because these fertilizers do not
add synthetic chemicals into the soils or plants, many gardeners
believe this is a healthier way to garden. This section describes
organic and homemade fertilizers, as well as how to construct
compost and vermipost bins.
What Is Composting? Composting is the recycling of organic
matter like grass clippings, leaves, and raw kitchen waste
(no cooked foods!) such as fruit and vegetable peelings, apple
cores, and eggshells. Compost bins are easy to make and use.
Commercial
compost bin


GARDENING 73
.Nurturing Your Garden
Find a suitable location in your yard to place the bin.
Most gardeners keep compost bins in an area that receives
full sun and is convenient to their garden. This ensures that
the bin maintains a constantly warm temperature year-round.
Once you have found a sunny location for your compost bin,
collect the supplies listed below. Ask an adult to help you with
this project because the compost bin materials are heavy and
bulky for one person to hold.
To build your compost bin, gather the
following supplies:
• Four wooden pallets
• 54 wood screws or wood nails
• One hook-and-eye latch (the kind used for
screen doors)
• Six corner brackets (as shown in the illustration)
• Three hinges (as shown in the illustration)
• Heavy plastic sheeting (if you live in a dry climate)
• Weed matting (a woven plastic material)
• Brown dry items, such as leaves, dried hay, and
dried grass clippings
• Green wet items, such as fresh grass clippings and
raw kitchen waste (no meat or dairy products)
• Water (preferably from a garden hose)
Complete these steps to build and fill your compost
bin. You can bury kitchen scraps as you go, but make
sure all kitchen scraps are buried deep in the pile to
keep animals and insects from digging them up.
Step 1—Using the corner brackets as shown,
screw or nail three of the pallets together at
three points on each side.
Step 2—Attach the hinges to the front edge
of the bin so that the fourth pallet swings
like a door.
Compost bin
CORNER
BRACKETS 1
HINGES
2


74 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
Step 3—Attach the last pallet to the bolt
hinges to make a door. Then attach the
hook-and-eye latch that will secure the door
in place.
Step 4—In dry climates, line the bin with
heavy plastic sheeting to maintain moisture
levels and temperatures. Staple a sheet of
plastic to the three sides of the bin. Use a
separate plastic sheet for the front door.
Step 5—Once your bin is stable and in
its permanent location, fill your compost
bin with ingredients from the top in the
following order:
a. Place a layer of weed matting on the
bottom of the bin. This will help prevent
weeds, keep out fire ants, and aid
in drainage.
b. Add a 3-inch layer of hay, straw, or broken
sticks and twigs over the weed matting to
cover the entire bottom of the bin. This
creates a drainage area.
c. Add a layer of brown waste, then a layer
of green waste, and another layer of
brown waste.
HOOK-AND-EYE LATCH
5a
3
4


GARDENING 75
.Nurturing Your Garden
d. Continue layering in the following order
until the bin is full or you have added all
the waste: (1) sticks or hay, (2) brown
layer, (3) green layer, and (4) brown layer.
When the bin is full, soak it with the
garden hose. The entire pile should feel like
a wet sponge when you touch it. Cover the
inside of the bin with another layer of weed
matting, then secure the cover of the bin by
laying large rocks on it. Have an adult help
you attach the cover to two corners of the top
of the bin. Stapling or nailing the cover will
help secure it during bad weather.
Using a shovel, hard rake, or pitchfork,
till (turn over) the contents of your bin once
a week. When you have turned the pile, hold
your bare hand near the center of it. You should feel heat rising
from the pile. In the winter, you might see steam emerging as
you till. This heat means your pile is composting well. A cool
pile will need more green waste or water to get it going.
Add new ingredients and water when you till. Your compost
should be ready in three to six months.
5d
Tip: Remember
not to include
cooked foods,
raw or cooked
meat, or dairy
items, because
they cannot be
composted
successfully.
How Green Is
Your Garden?
When you create a garden,
you make many choices:
What kind of pest control
and fertilizer will you use,
if any? What kinds of plants
will you include?
“Stewardship gardening,” “green gardening,”
“environmental gardening,” and “sustainable garden-
ing” are all terms that refer to the same basic ideas
and goals. That is, how can people grow the garden
they would like, but at the same time do as little
damage to the environment as possible?


76 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
Here are some of the ways you can help
preserve natural resources as you garden.
• Whenever possible, use electric or
manual lawn equipment instead of
those with gasoline engines. Using a
gasoline-powered lawnmower for an
hour produces the same amount of
pollution as driving a car 100 miles.
• Choose hardy plants native to your
region. Such plants will have more
natural resistance to local pests, and
therefore need less pesticide.
• Make your own compost. You are recycling what
would have gone into the trash, and creating your
own fertilizer instead of purchasing it.
• Plant trees. In addition to emitting fresh oxygen
and controlling soil erosion, well-placed trees can
shade your home in summer and buffer the cold
winter winds.
• Plant natural pesticides such as garlic and
marigolds. Let beneficial insects such as
ladybugs fight your plants’ enemies.
• Conserve water. Use mulch (but not Cypress
mulch) to keep soil moist.
Water plants (preferably very
early in the morning) with a
soaker hose to reduce water
waste and evaporation.
• Make a happy home for
wildlife. Birds, butterflies,
and other critters are being
pushed out of their natural
homes as humans intrude
on their habitats. Your
garden could provide a
much-needed refuge.


GARDENING 77
.Nurturing Your Garden
What Is Vermiposting? A vermipost is a worm bin filled
with—you guessed it—worms, and is maintained by
gardeners to generate organic compost. Vermiposting is a
bit more complicated than composting. But even with the
extra work, it can be a lot of fun to watch worms recycle
your kitchen waste. Worm castings are highly prized by
organic gardeners as a potent, natural fertilizer.
You will need 1 square foot of surface space in your
vermipost bin for each pound of waste. To determine how
large your vermipost bin should be, measure the kitchen
waste your family produces for one week. Collect raw
vegetable and fruit peelings, coffee grounds, and egg
shells in gallon-sized airtight plastic bags (zipper freezer
bags work best). Store the waste sealed in the bags in the
refrigerator for one week. Use a standard bathroom scale
to weigh your collection at the end of the week.
To help meet the merit badge requirements, you
may reduce the size of your vermipost bin to compost
half the weight of your family’s weekly waste amount.
If the weight is 5 pounds, build a small vermipost bin
to compost 2.5 pounds of waste. You can increase the
bin’s size later on.
Once you have determined the size of bin, gather
the supplies listed below:
• Plastic or wood container, at least 8 inches high by
12 inches wide and 18 inches long
• Shredded newspaper
• Clean builder’s or sandbox sand
• 1 to 2 pounds of red wiggler worms (purchase
from organic gardening centers, the internet, or
mail order catalogs)
• 5 pounds of unbleached, unpainted aquarium gravel
• Tray to catch drainage
Follow these steps to build your vermipost bin.
Step 1—Punch holes in the sides and ends of the
container to allow air to circulate. Holes should be about
2 inches above the bottom. Punch three small holes in
the bottom of the container to catch any drainage.
Step 2—Layer 2 inches of the aquarium gravel in
the bottom of the container. This ensures drainage.
1
2


78 GARDENING
Nurturing Your Garden.
Step 3—Tear black-and-white newsprint into 1- and 11
⁄2-
inch strips. Do not use colored newsprint, advertisements,
or magazine print. The dyes used in the inks are toxic to
worms and will kill them.
Step 4—Moisten the strips with water and mix them
with a few handfuls of sand.
Step 5—Fill the container three-quarters full with
the mixture.
Step 6—Buy 1 to 2 pounds of red wiggler worms. These
worms are a kind of earthworm specifically adapted to
eating rotting vegetable matter. Other kinds of worms will
not perform this kind of composting. You can buy red
worms at organic garden centers and through the internet
or mail order catalogs (with your parent or guardian’s
permission).
Step 7—Place the red worms, soil and all,
in the container.
Step 8—Add approximately 2 inches of dry shredded
newsprint and cover the container with a solid plastic
or wood cover.
Step 9—Feed the worms once or twice a week by pulling
up some of the mixture and burying waste in small holes
at different locations in the bin. Do not feed the worms if
they have not finished their last meal. Overfeeding causes
the food waste to sit around too long, which creates a
foul odor and attracts flies and gnats. If you overfeed the
worms, stop adding food waste until the worms have
composted what is already in there.
3
4
8
Five pounds of kitchen waste would equal
5 square feet of surface area in a vermipost
bin. The bin would need to measure at least
12 inches wide and 5 feet long to accommodate
enough worms to consume all that waste!


GARDENING 79
.Nurturing Your Garden
Step 10—Find a warm location where the temperature
will remain between 55 and 85 degrees. Colder or
hotter temperatures may kill the worms. The crawl
space beneath a house or a shady corner of the yard
are good locations for vermipost bins during the
spring, summer, and fall. In the winter, vermipost
bins should be moved indoors to the basement or
other unused space.
Step 11—Place your bin on top of the blocks on the
drain tray.
Step 12—Empty the drain tray into a bucket as needed.
Save the juice in an old milk container or plastic soda
bottle. You can mix this juice with water to make liquid
fertilizer for your garden.
After about two months, you will see dark material that looks
a lot like coffee grounds beginning to form at the bottom
of the bin. These are the worm castings. Gently spoon the
castings out into another container and add more bedding for
your worms the next time you feed them. Use the castings to
fertilize your garden.
What Do Worms Eat?
You can feed vermipost worms any of the following: nongreasy
leftovers, fruit and vegetable peels and scraps, bread, coffee grounds,
tea bags, and ground eggshells.
Do not feed worms dairy products, meat, or bone products because
worms have difficulty eating these and the items will decay slowly,
attracting flies and rodents and creating foul odors.
11





GARDENING 81
.All About Bees
All About Bees
You may have never thought much about honey bees, but
there has been a strong relationship between bees and humans
for thousands of years. Without these winged creatures, many
of our food sources would be in great peril. We rely on honey
bees not only for the sweet honey they make, but more impor-
tantly for their ability to pollinate many of the crops and live-
stock feed our farmers grow.
The Pollination Process
Some plants can produce seeds only if pollen is exchanged
between flowers on the same plant, or from flowers of different
plants from the same variety. Apple blossoms, for instance, need
pollen from a different apple variety to set fruit; that can happen
only when a honey bee or other pollinator visits blossoms from
two different trees. Some plants, most grasses (corn, wheat, rice),
some nut trees, and most conifers produce a lot of pollen, which is
blown by the wind from one plant to another so seeds can be set.
Birds, bats, bumblebees, butterflies, and many other crea-
tures help transfer pollen as they flit from flower to flower or
feed on the nectar of several flowers. Honey bees, however,
have three advantages over all of these other pollinators.
First, they practice what biologists call flower fidelity.
That is, on a foraging trip they visit only one kind of flower so
that when they transfer pollen it is to a flower that can use it.
For example, a pollinator might fly from dandelion to clover
to apple blossom, but that effort would be useless to all three
plants. Honey bees pollinate with a purpose.
The second advantage is simply numbers. A full-size
colony—whether living in a human engineered colony or a
hollow tree—produces thousands of pollinating individuals during
the growing season. This gives them the efficiency of numbers
other pollinating insects do not have.


82 GARDENING
All About Bees.
The third reason is that honey bees
can be raised in hives made by humans.
These hives can be moved to a crop
when it is blooming. The hives can also
be relocated to make honey elsewhere or
to pollinate yet another crop.
The full-size honey bee colony is
made up of three castes, or social groups:
a queen, a few hundred drones, and
thousands of worker bees. There are
also the developing young. The queen is
basically an egg laying machine. She can
lay 1,500 to 2,000 eggs a day in the sum-
mer. Drones are short-lived nonworker
males that mate with queens from other
colonies. Workers are infertile female
honey bees that literally do all of the work,
including protecting the colony and all of
the foraging for food; in the process they
pollinate all those seeds. Eggs, larvae, and
pupae are the developing bees.
As far as humans are concerned,
pollination is the honey bee’s most
important job; it is a fairly simple process.
Foraging worker bees go from the flower
of one plant to that of another of the
same species seeking food. This food
is nectar, a sugar-rich liquid that plants
produce to attract honey bees and other
pollinators. As a forager sucks in nectar
from the base of the flower, she collects
pollen from its anthers on the hairs of
her body.
Some of this pollen brushes onto the
sticky stigma of the next flower. That is
how pollen is transferred from flower to
flower. This leads to fertilization and the
production of a new seed, enabling the
pollinated plant to produce seed from
which a new plant may grow. These
seeds may later be wrapped in the flesh of a delicious fruit or
vegetable possible only because of the pollination services of
our friend the honey bee.
Her long, large abdomen makes the
queen’s wings appear shorter than her
nest mates and makes her stand out
among the workers. But indeed, her
wings are the same size as theirs, and
she can fly as well as they can.
The pupae of honey bee drones to the
right are more developed than those on
the left.


GARDENING 83
.All About Bees
Imagine now how different our world and eating habits
would be if we had no honey bees to pollinate. Our supply
of fresh fruits and vegetables would be greatly compromised.
Many of the vegetables and fruits in the garden you are plan-
ning for this merit badge probably would not exist. Farmers
would worry about the availability of many of the feeds for
their animals. Cows, horses, chickens, and pigs all eat honey
bee–pollinated feeds.
Pollination by honey bees is vital to humankind. We must be
aware of the problems facing our honey bee population and work
to help prevent these problems. Some of the challenges affecting
honey bee populations worldwide may involve parasites such as
mites, exposure to pesticides and other chemicals, malnutrition,
stress, and loss of forage. According to scientists, multiple factors
may lead to what is called colony collapse disorder, or certainly
honey bee population decline.
How Honey Is Made
Honey bee workers begin their tasks the day they emerge—fully
developed—from their cell. They start by feeding young larvae,
cleaning recently emptied honey comb cells, caring for the queen,
and guarding the colony from robbers and other predators such as
skunks, bears, and—in their opinion—beekeepers. The last task
she undertakes as she ages is as a forager, gathering and storing
nectar and pollen for food for the colony.
When a bee enters a flower, she sucks in the nectar and car-
ries it in her honey stomach. During her trip she adds some sali-
va that contains the enzyme invertase to help convert nectar to
honey. Back at the hive, she gives the nectar to another worker
bee and the evaporation process begins. The bees evaporate the
sugary nectar to a thick and sweet product that helps keep the
honey from spoiling. It is then placed in the beeswax cells of the
honey comb. A thin layer of new beeswax helps protect the cell.
Colony Collapse Disorder
Many scientists believe a number of factors can contribute to a
colony’s demise and lead to what is called colony collapse disorder.
Among them, exposure to pesticides and other chemicals, stress,
disease, malnutrition, attack from pests such as mites, and the
destruction of food sources all can negatively affect a colony.
Scientists say there is no one reason.
Sweet! It takes
some 20,000 bees
to collect one
pound of nectar,
which converts to
a little less than
a quarter pound
of honey.


84 GARDENING
All About Bees.
The Hive
In the wild, bees make honey
and may store it in a cavity in a
hollow tree, your attic, or any-
where else safe and out of the
elements. To manage bees effi-
ciently, beekeepers use a structure
made by humans—a multipart
“hive.” It serves as a safe home
for bees and as a practical and
manageable collection station for
the beekeeper.
Parts of a Modern Beehive
This hive has many parts, each
one with a specific purpose and
function. At the bottom, there
is a hive stand with an alighting
board. Although not essential, it
keeps the hive off wet ground.
Resting on the stand is the
bottom board or floor of your hive. Bees enter through the
opening between this board and the hive body above it.
The human-constructed beehive must have
movable frames to be legal.
OUTER COVER
INNER COVER
SECTION SUPER
QUEEN EXCLUDER
SHALLOW SUPER
HIVE BODY
BOTTOM BOARD
HIVE STAND
Optional Requirement 8e
If you want to choose optional requirement 8e, first find out
whether you are allergic to bee stings. To determine this, visit
an allergist or your family physician. If you are allergic to bee
stings, you should choose another option.
In completing requirement 8e, your counselor can help you find
an established beekeeper. Ask if the beekeeper can meet with you and
a buddy, if you can help prepare the supers for use in the beekeeper’s
hive, then return later to help collect the honey and prepare it for
market. Before your visit, be sure your buddy also has been checked
by a physician and is not allergic to bee stings.
For help with locating a beekeeper in your state, visit
beeculture.com and click on “Resources,” then select “Find Help” and
“Find a Local Beekeeper.”


GARDENING 85
.All About Bees
Mounted on the bottom board is an entrance-contracting
cleat that makes the entrance smaller. This helps keep out
cold air and makes the entrance easier to defend from robbers.
The cleat, which can be removed in hot weather, helps weak
colonies guard the entrance and prevent robbing by stronger
colonies. If robbing has already started, a beekeeper might put
a bunch of loose grass over the hive entrance to discourage
robbers from entering, or reduce the entrance so that only one
bee at a time can enter.
Sitting on top of the bottom board is the brood chamber
box or boxes. Often called a deep super, it can be one large
box or two medium-size boxes. These boxes are used by the
bees and managed by the beekeeper to provide an area where
young bees can be raised. Some honey and lots of pollen also
are stored there and used to feed the developing young bees.
Each rectangular frame provides support and surrounds
comb foundation made of pure beeswax. Foundation is a sheet
of beeswax or plastic embossed with the typical six-sided cell
outline. This gives the bees a head start on where to build
their beeswax honey comb and store honey and pollen.
Between the boxes where brood are raised and the boxes
above this area, some beekeepers use a queen excluder to
make colony management easier. This device is made of a wire
grid with spaces in between that are large enough for workers
to pass through but too small for queens and drones. When
placed between the hive body and the honey supers, the queen
cannot enter the honey storage area to lay eggs.
Every hive has a warehouse, where bees store honey not
needed to feed their young or for everyday feeding but to save
for winter months. This warehouse is simply a deep or medi-
um-size—or even smaller—box called a shallow, or a special
box used for producing comb honey.
Any bee can be a criminal or robber. Robbers will generally overpower
the guards of a weaker colony and carry the food supply back to their
own hive. A beekeeper who sees bees flying around the hive corners
or entrances with a quick, sneaky motion should suspect robbing.
To help prevent robbing, beekeepers keep the hive cover bee-tight,
don’t leave frames exposed when honey is scarce, and don’t leave
a hive open long.
Beekeepers
use supers with
regular movable
combs to produce
extracted (liquid)
honey, and with
round section
honey supers
to produce
comb honey.


86 GARDENING
All About Bees.
Many beekeepers use an inner cover to help insulate bees
from heat and cold and an outer cover over the top super
for protection. The main feature of the movable frame hive
is space where bees walk around inside the hive. These are
spaces one-quarter to about three-eighths of an inch between
each frame and the sides of the hive body.
If you leave a space larger than bee space—say you for-
get to replace a broken frame—the bees will fill it with honey
comb, leaving just enough space for walking between the
new comb and nearby frames. If you squeeze frames so close
together the bees can’t walk through, they will fill that space
with propolis to keep pests and predators out.
Propolis is the
sticky, gummy
substance bees
gather from
plants. Bees use
it to fill small
spaces where
bacteria and
fungi could hide,
smooth rough
spots, and reduce
areas needing
protection, such
as an entrance
that is too large.
Tools and Clothing
You can control bees using a little smoke from a
bee smoker. Smoke has a quieting effect on bees,
which is why the smoker is one of the beekeeper’s
most useful tools. This cylindrical container holds
smoldering fuel that produces the smoke. Squeezing
a bellows attached to the cylinder forces air from the
bellows through a small opening at the bottom of
the cylinder and up through the smoldering fuel,
and pushes the smoke out the spout.
Pine needles, rotten wood, corncobs, cotton
waste, and scraps of burlap from untreated burlap
bags are used as fuel. Point the spout just above the
hive so that the bees nearest the smoker don’t get
too much smoke as you squeeze the bellows. Do
not over-smoke the hive. Too much smoke will cause
the bees to become immune to
its effects and it will not offer
any protection. Err on the side
of too little rather than too much
smoke, and stay safe.
When working with bees,
wear smooth, light-colored
clothes and long sleeves.


GARDENING 87
.All About Bees
A bee suit—a zippered coverall
fastened at the wrists and ankles
with loop and hook bands—
is safe and easy to use. Wear
high-topped shoes or boots and
good leather gloves. Always
wear a veil, preferably one with
a stiff screen made of wire or
plastic so it stands out from your
face. Fasten it securely around
the neck. You should never be
without a veil when working
with bees.
Most important is that you
feel safe with your gear. A good,
complete outfit will essentially
eliminate all opportunities for
any errant bees to sting.
Be sure to join a local beekeeping club, read several good books, and
find an experienced beekeeper to work with, for free, for the experi-
ence. If your merit badge counselor is not a beekeeper, your counselor
can help you find one.
Let the Honey Flow Begin
Before the honey begins to flow, beekeepers should be prepared
by making sure their colonies are completely free of disease and
full—but not too full—of bees. The queens should have their
hives full of brood, but with enough room for egg laying.
If you suspect trouble in a colony, first check with your
mentor or an experienced local beekeeper if possible
for the most timely response. Otherwise, call your
state or county bee (apiary) inspector and schedule a
visit with someone from the county extension office
as soon as possible. See the resources section at the
end of this pamphlet for more information.


88 GARDENING
All About Bees.
Adding more boxes may help, but at some point there
are more bees than the queen can control, and the bees will
swarm. What happens next? Basically, about half the bees and
the old queen decide that the weather, available food outside,
and their good health will allow them to leave the hive and
begin a new hive, thus reproducing the colony. This is how
honey bee colonies increase their numbers. Beekeepers try to
avoid this by removing some of the bees and starting another
colony before the bees do, thus gaining another colony for
themselves and saving both colonies to make honey.
As a rule of thumb, flowers begin blooming in early spring
in southern states—as early as February in the far South. Maples
and willows bloom first, followed by the rest of the plants. As the
weather warms, blooming moves farther north.
Equipment
A beekeeper needs honey supers. These are above the brood
nest, perhaps above a queen excluder (see the illustrated
beehive earlier in this chapter). They serve as the hive’s
warehouse removable combs in which honey is stored.
Supers are added as bees begin to show evidence of
needing more storage space.
Putting on Supers
Exactly when to put on that first super will depend
upon your location. In general, add a super just
before the honey flow begins. Working with local
beekeepers (attend a local association meeting)
and good records will tell when productive local
honey plants begin to bloom in your area. Use this
guide: If the combs have fresh white wax along the
top bars, the honey flow has already begun and
you are a bit late.
Southern beekeepers need to be ready for the honey flow very early;
beekeepers in the far North must wait until April or even July for
some crops. It pays to know when the local honey crops bloom. An
experienced beekeeper can be very helpful sharing this information.
Beekeepers reuse their honey supers. After extracting the honey, they
place the honey supers back on the hives they were harvested from so the
bees can clean them up and use the small amount of honey left there.


GARDENING 89
.All About Bees
Honey bees need extra room early to store and cure nectar
before it becomes honey. If none is available, they will try and
make some by building that white comb on the top bars—or
they may simply quit collecting nectar; this is honey missed.
Usually, a beekeeper puts on only one super at a time. If
a few combs are partly filled with honey or nectar, you might
put them in the center of the first super, especially if it is full
of foundation and not honey comb. This will “bait” the bees to
come to that super and build new comb storage cells and, as
beekeepers say, “draw them out.”
A super is usually ready to be removed for extracting
when at least 75 percent and preferably 100 percent of the
honey-filled cells are capped over. First remove supers that
are not quite full and replace them directly above the queen
excluder. Above the partially filled supers, place those that are
completely capped and ready to harvest.
There are several ways to separate bees from frames in the
filled supers, although it is probably best to have a local bee-
keeper show you which method to use. You can:
• Brush them off in front of the hive so they go right back in.
• Use a bee escape board, a board with a one-way entrance so
that bees above the board in the capped honey frame can go
below to keep warm at night but not return the next day.
• Use a fume board, a device that puts a smell into the super
that bees don’t like (but you will) so they leave.
• Use a bee blower if you have lots of bees. This works much
like a leaf blower, dislodging the bees from the super once
it’s removed, then they can fly back to the hive.
Don’t be tempted to add too many supers too fast.
The bees won’t be able to guard them, and small
hive beetles and wax moths will gain a foothold. This
is where beekeeping becomes more of an “art” than
a science, and experience is a good teacher. Once
the honey flow slows up, stop adding supers. Let the
bees fill existing supers. Remove honey as fast as it
becomes ripe.
Capped over
means that the
honey is sealed
into the cell
with wax.


90 GARDENING
All About Bees.
Extracting Honey
Once harvested, the honey-filled supers must be protected from
robbers. The sooner you extract the honey the better. If you can’t
extract it immediately, completely cover both the bottom and top
of the pile of supers and all holes and cracks temporarily with
duct tape. Before you begin, place the supers in a warm room if
possible. Warm honey flows faster and strains easier than cold
honey, and soft, warm cappings wax is easier to remove than wax
that is cold and hard.
Extractors come in two styles. The tangential extractor
usually holds a small number of frames and requires more
work but is more affordable. The radial extractor is more
expensive than a tangential, but it makes the extracting
process easier. An experienced beekeeper can show you
how to use an extractor.
When you are ready, set up the extracting area with the
warmed supers, uncapping tank, and your uncapping tools
nearby. Some beekeepers use electrically heated knives, some
use sharp uncapping knives heated in hot water, and others
use large machines that do this task automatically. Keep the
extractor close to the uncapping tank so uncapped frames can
immediately go into the extractor. If you are using a small
extractor, you will be uncapping faster than you are extracting.
Have a clean tub of some sort to store uncapped, honey-drip-
ping frames in until you can extract them.
Be sure the extractor is well lubricated and the gate at the
bottom isn’t stuck shut. Anchor it to the floor or something
solid to help keep it from moving around. Put the strainer in
place on top of the empty pail. Keep it and multiple pails clean
and ready to use. Finally, have empty supers ready for when
you remove frames from the extractor. These will be sticky and
dripping honey, so protect the floor below the supers where
they will be returned.
Use a hive tool to loosen frames in the first super you
will uncap so they are easy to grasp and remove. Place the
first frame on the crossbar that rests on top of the uncapping
tank. The bar often has a nail sticking out where you can rest
the frame, making it easy to turn since you uncap both sides
before placing it in the extractor.
Beekeepers
harvest beeswax
by collecting and
then melting old
or broken combs
and the beeswax
covers, called
cappings. The
cappings cover
and protect the
honey when it is
in the hive and are
removed during
honey extraction.
Once harvested,
cappings are
melted, filtered,
and cleaned,
ready to be used
for a variety
of purposes.


GARDENING 91
.All About Bees
Begin cutting the wax capping from the top or bottom of
the frame, tipped so that the wax capping falls off the frame
into the tub below. Some begin at the bottom, some at the
top. Experiment and find the way that works best for you and
makes the least mess. After enough combs are uncapped, load
the extractor.
Extracted, liquid honey, strained and clean, is now ready
to be bottled and given to friends or sold. Use clean jars with
a tight lid and a label identifying the beekeeper. Make sure the
bottles are not sticky when ready to sell or give away.
Your uncapping should allow the honey trapped in the
wax to drip below so after a day or so most of the honey has
drained. Empty and strain the honey. Place the cappings in
a pail half full of water and wash off the remaining honey.
Freeze them for a short period of time to kill the wax moth, or
melt it down in a solar wax melter to a usable form.
Processing Comb Honey
Extractors are not needed to produce
comb honey. The round-section super
is removed from the hive and the indi-
vidual round sections gently removed
from the frames. Harvest sections
when completely filled with honey
and completely capped, with no holes
or damage. Place the plastic caps that
came with the equipment on each side.
You can cut incomplete sections for cut
comb honey, return them to the bees if the honey is still flow-
ing, crush and strain them for the liquid honey, or save them
and feed them back to the bees later, for winter feed.
The completed sections should be placed in airtight plastic
bags and immediately frozen for a few days to kill wax moth
eggs. If allowed to hatch, the larvae will burrow through the
delicate comb and ruin it.
The wax from
cappings, the
finest you can
harvest, is prized
by anyone making
lotions, creams,
or candles.
Honey bees produce beeswax, which is useful in
making candles, cosmetics, salves, ointments,
polishes, and many other products. It is also used
to make candy coating.


92 GARDENING
All About Bees.
A Dozen Tips for Establishing
Your First Hive of Bees
These helpful tips for new beekeepers come from Kim Flottum, author of
The Backyard Beekeeper and editor of Bee Culture magazine. (See the
resources section.)
1. Have the hive in its location and the hive stand and all equipment ready before
you pick up your bees. Assemble and paint all the woodenware, and insert the
foundation into the frames. Pick a good place to keep the bees, out of the way in
the yard and safe from animals and curious neighbors. Put a screen in front of
the hive, about 4 or 5 feet away, so when the bees leave they fly up and out of
the way in the yard.
2. When you pick up your package, make sure it is OK, with only a few dead bees
on the bottom and no leaks in the screened sides. Transport it safely, especially
if it is hot outside. Bees can perish in just a few minutes left in the trunk of
your car. Some dealers sell a net with a drawstring to transport your package
to and from the car. Keep the air conditioning running.
As soon as you get home, put the package in a cool, dark place (like a garage
or basement) until you are ready to install the bees. Spray the screened sides
with a 1:1 sugar mist to settle and feed the hungry bees; don’t rely on the feed
provided in the package. The syrup will keep them busy while you prepare.
3. Get your hive ready. Remove half the frames from the middle of the box. Have
a hive tool, screwdriver, pliers, rubber bands, a piece of cardboard or plywood
large enough to cover the feeder can hole if no cover is provided, and a sugar
spray bottle ready. Put on your full protective gear. Have a feeding can or top
feeder ready and full, and an extra super ready to cover the feeder can if you
use one.
4. When the box is ready, within a foot or two on one side of the hive, gently
thump the package on the ground so the bees inside fall to the bottom of the
package, away from the queen cage and feeder can. Pry off the cover on the
top of the package if there is one, but keep it close. Using your hive tool or a
screwdriver, carefully remove the can inside containing food, shake the bees
off in front of the hive, and quickly cover the hole in the package.
5. This sometimes happens, but don’t drop the queen cage—which is suspended
right next to the can—into the bees below. If you replace the cover so the bees
don’t leave, gently roll the bees in the cage until you can locate the queen
cage. Carefully remove the cage and put in your pocket to keep her warm. As
soon as you have her, cover the hole. There will be some bees in the air, but
they are confused and shouldn’t be a problem. Don’t worry; this is why you
have your veil on.
6. If the queen cage is still in the slot or hole, remove it now and place the cage
in a pocket to keep her warm.


GARDENING 93
.All About Bees
7. Spray the bees with the sugar syrup, then thump the cage to settle them to
the bottom of the cage.
8. Carefully dump the bees into the cavity produced when the frames were
removed. Bees will definitely be in the air now, but they are looking for their
nest mates and don’t care much about you. They are not defending a nest
yet and have little inclination to sting.
9. Let the bees in the box spread out on the bottom and begin to move onto
the frames. Place the screened package cage in front of the hive’s opening so
stragglers can make their way into the hive. Slowly replace the frames, not
squishing the bees. When you are ready to put in the last frame, remove the
queen cage from your pocket.
Using the tin strip or holder, suspend the cage between the last two frames not
quite in the middle of the box. If there is nothing around to hang the cage, take
the last frame and place the queen cage horizontally on the face of the foun-
dation with the screened side out. Put two or three rubber bands around the
frame to hold her cage in place and return the last frame to the box.
Do not remove either of the corks covering the openings in the ends of the
queen’s cage. The bees will start to surround the queen to keep her warm
and feed her. Put the feeder on top of the frames but not over the queen.
Put another box over the feeder, then the cover to protect it all.
You are done for now. Gather your tools, then watch for a bit as the bees
find the door and begin to search for food. A good experiment is to see how
long it is before they begin to fly.
10. Return in four or five days. Check if you need to refill the feeder. Bees will
eat a lot of sugar syrup, and you must not let them go hungry, even if they
are flying and bringing in nectar and pollen. Three days of rain and they
can starve to death, so make sure they have more than enough food, all
the time.
Using a tiny bit of smoke, move the bees away from the frame with the queen
cage still fastened to it. Remove the frame, remove the queen cage, and now
remove the cork on the candy end of the cage and replace as before.
11. In a week, check again. The queen should be released from the cage and
laying eggs. If not, remove the cork on the other end and replace the cage
as before, and she will walk right out, ready to go to work. The worker bees
should be flying, bringing home pollen and nectar. If you started with foun-
dation, there should be two or three combs, with new comb being built so
the bees have a place to store food and raise their young. Congratulations!
You are now a beekeeper.
12. Check the hive again in a couple of weeks to make sure the queen is
working, comb is being built, that some of the brood (white grub-like larvae)
are large enough to see in the cells, and that honey is being made. Make
sure there is food in the feeder and pollen is coming in.





.Careers in Gardening
Careers in Gardening
Gardening is a very rewarding experience in many ways. You
may learn how to grow vegetables, fruits, flowers, shrubs and
trees. You are usually outdoors so you can experience the joys
of nature in your environment.
To take a seed or small plant and watch it grow is truly
exciting. If there are setbacks, which can happen, you can
be a detective and try to determine what went wrong and try
again. Do not be discouraged, as this happens to everyone.
Gardening also can be a source of socializing with
others who enjoy the same experiences; it can be a teaching
experience as you share your growing results with
others.
To
continue
further there
are many
fields of
opportunity
related to
gardening.
Gardening
may lead to a degree
to become a horticulturist,
arborist, landscape designer,
landscape architect, botanist
and even an entomologist.
There are boundless
possibilities that await.


96 GARDENING
Gardening Resources.
Gardening Resources
Scouting Literature
Architecture and Landscape Architecture,
Bird Study, Insect Study, Nature, Plant
Science, and Soil and Water Conservation
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bartholomew, Mel. All New Square Foot
Gardening, 3rd ed. Cool Springs
Press, 2018.
Bradley, Fern Marshall, Barbara W. Ellis,
and Ellen Phillips, eds. Rodale’s Ultimate
Encyclopedia of Organic Gardening.
Rodale Press, 2017.
Bush, Michael. The Practical Beekeeper:
Beekeeping Naturally, volumes I, II, and
III. X-Star Publishing Company, 2011.
Cranshaw, Whitney, and David Shetlar.
Garden Insects of North America: The
Ultimate Guide to Backyard Bugs, 2nd ed.
Princeton University Press, 2018.
Elzer-Peters, Katie. Beginner’s Illustrated
Guide to Gardening: Techniques to Help
You Get Started. Cool Springs Press, 2012.
Flottum, Kim. The Backyard Beekeeper: An
Absolute Beginner’s Guide to Keeping
Bees in Your Yard and Garden, 4th ed.
Quarry Books, 2018.
Gillman, Jeff. The Truth About Garden
Remedies: What Works, What Doesn’t,
and Why. Timber Press, 2008.
McGee, Rose Marie Nichols, and Maggie
Stuckey. The Bountiful Container.
Workman Publishing Company, 2002.
Phillips, Ellen, and C. Colston Burrell.
Rodale’s Illustrated Encyclopedia of
Perennials. Rodale Press, 2004.
Pleasant, Barbara. Starter Vegetable Gardens:
24 No-Fail Plans for Small Organic
Gardens. Storey Publishing, 2010.
Pleasant, Barbara, and Deborah L. Martin. The
Complete Compost Gardening Guide. Storey
Publishing, 2008.
Richardson, Fern. Small-Space Container
Gardens: Transform Your Balcony, Porch,
or Patio With Fruits, Flowers, Foliage, and
Herbs. Timber Press, 2012.
Sanchez, Janet, and the editors of Sunset
Books. Perennials, 2nd ed. Sunset
Books, 2000.
Periodicals
Bee Culture
800-289-7668 (option 4)
beeculture.com
Garden Gate
800-341-4769
gardengatemagazine.com
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


GARDENING 97
.Gardening Resources
Mother Earth News
800-234-3368
motherearthnews.com
Organizations and Websites
American Horticultural Society
ahsgardening.org
Back Yard Beekeepers Association
backyardbeekeepers.com
Bee Research Laboratory
USDA Agricultural Research Service
301-504-8205
ars.usda.gov/northeast-area/beltsville-md-
barc/beltsville-agricultural-research-center/
bee-research-laboratory/
Home and Garden Television
hgtv.com/outdoors/gardens
National Gardening Association
garden.org
National Wildlife Federation
800-822-9919
nwf.org
Old Farmer’s Almanac
603-563-8111
almanac.com
Trust for Public Land
T800-714-5263
tpl.org
U.S. Department of Agriculture
1400 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20250
833-ONE-USDA (833-663-8732)
usda.gov
U.S. National Arboretum
3501 New York Ave. NE
Washington, DC 20002-1958
202-245-4523
usna.usda.gov
World Aquaculture Society
225-347-5408
was.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Randy Lynn, D.V.M.,
for lending his subject expertise, time, and
assistance with the bee-related information in
this merit badge pamphlet.
We are grateful to Kim Flottum,
editor, Bee Culture magazine and author
of The Backyard Beekeeper, for providing
his subject expertise and time.
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National Merit
Badge Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Scott Bauer, USDA Agricultural Research
Service, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 60 (plant roots)
David Cappaert, Michigan State University,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 65 (butterfly)
Carl Dennis, Auburn University, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 82 (queen bee)
Getty Images—page 93
Roger Morgan—page 6
Susan Ellis, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 64 (assassin bug)
Barry Rice, sarracenia.com, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 51 (periwinkle)


Gardening Resources.
Forest and Kim Starr, U.S. Geological
Survey, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 60 (caterpillar)
U.S. Department of Agriculture, courtesy—
pages 10 (hardiness zones) and 46
(ChooseMyPlate)
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/Keith
Weller, courtesy—page 63 (nematodes)
Wikipedia.org/HitroMilanese/courtesy—page
51 (dahlia)
Wikipedia.org/Waugsberg—page 82 (pupae)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
Daniel Giles—pages 8, 9, 36, 47, 49
(coniferous and evergreen images), 50
(deciduous images), 51 (petunias), 56,
59, 61 (chewed leaf, bug droppings,
diseased fruit, tomato), 63 (grubs), 65
(toad), 66 (marigolds, Queen Anne’s
lace, daisies), 68, 69 (young gardener),
72 (label), and 77–79 (all images of Scout
assembling a vermipost bin)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on pages
39, 73–75, and 84
Brian Payne—page 58
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!


GARDENING 99
.Notes
!


100 GARDENING
Notes.