AMERICAN
HERITAGE


AMERICAN
HERITAGE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35852
ISBN 978-0-8395-3398-6
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/American-Heritage or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
FPO


AMERICAN HERITAGE 3


4 AMERICAN HERITAGE


AMERICAN HERITAGE 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Beginning at the Beginning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Heritage at Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Power of the People. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Your Friendly, Neighborhood Heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
History Like You Have Never Seen—or Heard. . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Extra! Extra! . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Careers in American Heritage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
The American Dream . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
American Heritage Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62





AMERICAN HERITAGE 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Think about this scenario: Your dad’s college roommate was
helping him study late one night at the dorm. They got hungry,
but it was so late the pizza delivery was closed. So they had
to drive to an all-night convenience store for snacks. On the
way, they see one of your dad’s classmates standing beside her
stalled car. Your dad and his roommate offer to give her a ride
home. They come inside to meet the girl’s roommate—who,
after a few years, becomes your mom.
Many events had to happen for your dad to meet your
mom. That does not count all the events that had to happen
for your dad’s roommate to be there to help him study, for the
girl’s car to break down when and where it did, and for your
future mom to be where she was at a certain moment in time.
If you think about it, history is sort of like that. Events of
today are all connected to events of the past, whether the past
is two hours ago or 200 years ago. You cannot have one without
the other. Events that happened centuries ago, no matter how
minor, probably affect what is happening today.
For instance, LeBron James might be one of the greatest
basketball players of all time. He began his pro career without
much controversy, but where would he be without the actions
of people throughout history?
Go back about 200 years, when legal slavery in the
South helped fuel the Civil War. When the war was settled,
Reconstruction began with the intent of granting full civil
rights to African Americans. Instead, Reconstruction angered
many Southern whites, resulting in fierce racial discrimination
in the South.


8 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Introduction.
Southern discrimination spurred African
American activist W.E.B. DuBois to help
create the National Association for the
Advancement of Colored People in 1909.
African American seamstress Rosa Parks
joined the NAACP in 1943. When she was
arrested in 1955 after refusing to give up
her bus seat to a white man, the NAACP
organized a local bus boycott. Local minister
Martin Luther King Jr. transformed that
boycott into a national movement for civil
rights. And many years later, Michael Jordan,
an African American athlete, enjoyed the
fruits of that movement as he became
known as one of the greatest basketball
players of all time.
Of course, this example is very simple.
In reality, thousands of events occurred
and millions of people worked together
to shape the United States into a country
where every person truly is equal. That is
the heart of American heritage—people and
events affecting one another over hundreds
of years to get us where we are today. You
must understand the events of yesterday
to appreciate and understand the events of
today. The past causes the present.
Understanding American heritage is
not about memorizing historical dates
and names. It is about understanding—for
example, understanding current events that
surrounded the signing of the Declaration of
Independence and why the signers believed
this document was so vital to establishing
the fundamental rights of the new republic.
If you comprehend what the declaration
meant to Americans then, you can appreciate
how the past has influenced your present.
Understanding your country’s heritage is
how you will come to truly know what it
means to be an American.
W.E.B. DuBois
Martin Luther King Jr.








AMERICAN HERITAGE 11
.Beginning at the Beginning
Beginning at
the Beginning
During the 1770s, American colonists were outraged. Although
they had been loyal subjects of the British Empire for years,
Americans suddenly were feeling like second-class citizens.
To help raise money for a war with France, Britain had
imposed taxes on everything from sugar to newspaper ads to
paper to tea. While the colonists had paid taxes locally, this
was the first time that the British Parliament—in which the
colonists had no representation—was imposing taxes on the
colonists alone. The colonists believed they should be treated
with the same rights and privileges as British citizens in Britain
itself. What was happening just was not fair.
Boston Tea Party


12 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Beginning at the Beginning.
When a group of men from Boston,
Massachusetts, dumped thousands of
dollars’ worth of tea into the harbor in
protest, the British responded harshly.
They hurt local businesses by closing
the Boston port, and they disbanded
an elected council and outlawed town
meetings. Americans wondered if what
was happening in Boston could happen
elsewhere in America.
Colonial leaders formed the first
Continental Congress to address what
they felt were unfair practices by Britain.
Their goal was to put economic pressure
on Britain—for instance, by boycotting
British products—so that Britain would
stop making harsh laws for the colonies.
The Continental Congress drew up a
list of complaints to send to Britain’s
King George III. There was little talk of
independence; the colonists just wanted
things returned to the way they had been.
King George never responded
directly to the colonists’ complaints.
Instead, he declared a state of rebellion
in the colonies in 1775 after colonists
resisted the British attempt to destroy
military stores at Lexington and Concord.
By year’s end, the king had banned all
Colonial trade.
Still, American leaders like George
Washington believed that they were
fighting for their basic rights within the
British Empire. It was a civil war, not a
war for independence. But that feeling did
not last. Thomas Paine’s Common Sense,
first published in January 1776, persuaded
many Americans to favor independence.
In June 1776, a committee was
chosen to write “The Unanimous
Declaration of the Thirteen United States
of America.” Today, we call this document
the Declaration of Independence.
King George III
George Washington


AMERICAN HERITAGE 13
.Beginning at the Beginning
The Declaration of Independence
As you read the declaration and put it into your own words,
you will notice that it can be broken down into five basic parts.
The Introduction. This tells the reader that the declaration
will explain the causes of America’s need for independence
from Great Britain.
The Preamble. This spells out the basic human rights to which
the colonists believed everyone was entitled. It states that when
people are denied these basic rights, it is their duty to overthrow
and break free of whoever is denying them these rights.
The Body (first section). This is a list of “abuses” put forth
by the king onto the colonists.
The Body (second section). This is a statement that the colo-
nists had tried everything to solve these problems with Britain,
without any luck.
The Conclusion. This states that because of these conditions,
it is the colonists’ right to separate from Britain. It declares the
states free from the British Empire. The 56 men who signed the
Declaration of Independence knew full well that the penalty
for it if they were caught by the British would be death.
When you read the Declaration of Independence, ask yourself
the following questions:
• What rights did the colonists believe
they had?
• Who gave them these rights, and who could
take them away?
• What purpose did the government serve in
securing these rights?
• Where did the government get its power?
The Declaration of Independence has
inspired people in other countries to fight for
basic rights, and it has inspired Americans to
continue fighting for what they believe are
the basic human rights they are entitled to.
As recently as 1963, Martin Luther King Jr.
invoked the document as a way to show that
all Americans—especially African Americans
being discriminated against because of their


14 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Beginning at the Beginning.
race—deserve freedom. King stated: “I have a dream that one
day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its
creed: ‘We hold these truths to be self-evident: that all men are
created equal.’”
Preamble to the Declaration of Independence
“…We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable
Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness—
That to secure these rights, Governments are instituted among Men,
deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed—that
whenever any Form of Government becomes destructive of these ends,
it is the Right of the People to alter or to abolish it, and to institute new
Government, laying its foundation on such principles and organizing its
powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to effect their
Safety and Happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that Governments
long established should not be changed for light and transient causes;
and accordingly all experience hath shewn, that mankind are more dis-
posed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when a long
train of abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same Object
evinces a design to reduce them under absolute Despotism, it is their
right, it is their duty, to throw off such Government, and to provide
new Guards for their future security. ”


AMERICAN HERITAGE 15
.Beginning at the Beginning
Symbolizing Independence
With the Declaration of Independence, the 13 colonies stated
their intent to separate from the mother country. But to
become truly independent, America needed its own symbols to
establish an identity apart from that of Great Britain.
The symbols of the United States represent the country’s
core beliefs and values. They signify what it means to be an
American. Many of these symbols have changed over the years,
often to reflect the changing attitudes within the country. As
you study America’s symbols, it is important to think about
what America’s core values and beliefs mean to different
Americans. What did those symbols mean to people when they
were first adopted? What do they mean today?
The American Flag
The flag that flies in front of your
school or your town hall is not the
same one that colonists fought under
during the American Revolution. In
fact, the design of the United States
flag has changed many times to reflect
the changing country.
The first official U.S. flag was
approved in 1777. To represent the
13 colonies, the flag had 13 horizon-
tal stripes and 13 stars in the canton,
or upper corner. There was no offi-
cial design of the stars, so several
patterns existed.
The Stars and Stripes was Francis
Scott Key’s inspiration to write “The
Star-Spangled Banner” in 1814.


16 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Beginning at the Beginning.
In 1795, two more stars and two more stripes were
added to represent the newest states, Vermont and Kentucky.
In 1818, after five more states had been admitted to the
union, Congress decided that the flag would always have just
13 stripes, but the number of stars would reflect the number
of states. Someday you may see additional changes to the
flag, for instance, if an American territory such as Puerto Rico
is admitted into the union.
The U.S. flag is the ultimate symbol of this country’s free-
dom. It inspired Francis Scott Key to write “The Star-Spangled
Banner.” The flag symbolizes freedom, not only for Americans,
but for people around the world.
Pledge of Allegiance
“I pledge allegiance to my Flag and the Republic for which it
stands; one nation indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.”
That was the original Pledge of Allegiance, as published in 1892.
In 1924, the phrase “my Flag” was replaced with “the flag
of the United States of America.” The pledge became official in
1942 but underwent one more change in 1954, when President
Dwight D. Eisenhower added the phrase “under God.” And
there is always the possibility that the pledge could undergo
more changes in the future.
Some people believe the phrase “under God” violates America’s
separation of church and state. In 2002, a man sued the
government to take out the phrase. On Flag Day two years
later, the Supreme Court dismissed the case. The ruling ensures
that students will continue to be able to recite the pledge in its
current form at school.
The most recent
change to the flag
was in 1960, after
Hawaii became a
U.S. state.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 17
.Beginning at the Beginning
The Great Seal and Bald Eagle
Look on the back of a dollar bill, and you
will see the front and back of the Great
Seal of the United States. Adopted in
1782 after six years of designs and
debates, the seal represents the coun-
try’s core values and beliefs.
The original design called for an
imperial eagle, but early Americans
decided that the seal should be
truly American. That is when the
American bald eagle became the
main element on the front of the seal.
In one talon is a bundle of 13 arrows
(representing the 13 colonies), in the other,
an olive branch. In its mouth, the eagle
holds an inscription: E Pluribus Unum,
which is Latin for “out of many, one”
and represents the union of the
American people.
The reverse side of the seal shows a 13-step, unfinished
pyramid representing the original 13 colonies and showing
that the country is always building and changing. The eye
and the motto over it, Annuit Coeptis (“He has favored our
undertakings”), allude to divine—or God’s—intervention in
the success of the country. The letters and numbers on the first
step of the pyramid are Roman numerals for 1776, the year
the Declaration of Independence was signed. The motto Novus
Ordo Seclorum, “a new order of the ages,” signifies a new era
of American influence.
In God We Trust
Religion has always played a role in America’s heritage.
Freedom of religion—allowing citizens to worship how
they choose—is one of the core values upon which
the United States was formed. The founding fathers
believed that a supreme power had guided them in their
fight for independence, so it is no surprise that references
to God appear in the Declaration of Independence, the
national motto, and the national anthem. The Constitution,
however, deliberately makes no reference to any kind of deity—
another guarantee of every American’s freedom of religion.
In the Great Seal, the olive branch
and arrows symbolize the power
of both peace and war.
”In God We Trust”


18 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Beginning at the Beginning.
The phrase “In God We Trust” began appearing on
American coins in 1864, during the Civil War. In 1908, leg-
islation made it mandatory to include the motto on all coins
issued in the United States, and in 1955 the motto was added
to all paper money as well. In 1956, “In God We Trust”
became our national motto.
The national motto has been challenged in court at least
three times. Some people are concerned that the motto forces
religion upon people. The courts usually have decided, however,
that the motto is not a religious statement. It is more of a reflec-
tion of America’s heritage, in which religion has played a role.
The National Anthem
In 1814, America was at war with Britain once again. A law-
yer named Francis Scott Key had boarded a British ship to
try to free a friend and became trapped in the middle of the
battle. From the ship, he watched as the British fired upon
Fort McHenry in Baltimore, Maryland.
Then one night, the shelling stopped. Had the Americans
surrendered? Had the British given up? As the sun began to
rise, Key saw the American flag was still flying high over the
fort. The United States had won the battle. Key was inspired
to write a poem he called “Defence of Fort M’Henry,” a title
that later became “The Star-Spangled Banner.”
The 13-step pyramid on the Great Seal represents the 13 original colonies.
Francis Scott Key
Americans
adopted “The
Star-Spangled
Banner” as their
national anthem
more than a
century before
Congress made it
official in 1931.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 19
.Beginning at the Beginning
The Star-Spangled Banner
By Francis Scott Key, 1814
O say, can you see, by the dawn’s early light,
What so proudly we hail’d at the twilight’s last gleaming?
Whose broad stripes and bright stars, thro’ the perilous fight,
O’er the ramparts we watch’d, were so gallantly streaming?
And the rockets’ red glare, the bombs bursting in air,
Gave proof thro’ the night that our flag was still there.
O say, does that star-spangled banner yet wave
O’er the land of the free and the home of the brave?
When dawn arose over the remains of a British-American naval battle, Francis
Scott Key was inspired to write.





AMERICAN HERITAGE 21
.Heritage at Home
Heritage at Home
Americans are known around the world for their independent
thinking and innovative ideas. They cherish their right to act
and speak as they please—as long as it does not hurt anyone
else. Americans know that with hard, honest work, the possi-
bilities of what they can achieve are limitless.
These values have been associated with the United States
since the country’s beginning. In few other countries do all
people enjoy such freedom, and that makes people proud to be
Americans and willing to defend their country and its values.
Family and Freedom
No matter if your family came over on the Mayflower or if you
are the first person in your family to be born in the United
States, your family history is important. Understanding how
your family came to the United States and what experiences
they had can help you understand American heritage.
To find out how to
learn more about
your own family
heritage, see the
resources section
at the end of
this pamphlet.


22 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Heritage at Home.
Only a few Americans can trace their families back to
the native people who were here before Europeans landed.
Most families arrived here to try to increase their fortunes or
to escape a hard life, as many Asian and European immigrants
did in the 1800s. Or they could have arrived after a forced
journey as an African slave.
Learning why your family came to America and how
they took part in American history—whether it was fighting in
the Civil War, helping to build a railroad that would connect
opposite ends of the country, marching in a protest for equal
rights for women, or simply casting their vote for a president—
helps you understand why history is more than just dates and
names. It is real people living real lives, whose actions—no
matter how small—affect the future.
Start researching your family history by talking to your
parents or guardian. Find out when and where they were born,
where they grew up, and how they met. Ask them what major
events affected their lives and how they responded to them.
See if they have any documents for you to look at, such as
birth and death certificates or a family Bible with names and
dates in it.
Immigrants arriving at Ellis Island
Americans’ right
to vote as their
hearts lead them
is a basic part of
our freedom.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 23
.Heritage at Home
Ask other relatives—especially older ones—the same
questions. Talk to your grandparents or guardian about where
they came from, and find out if they have any living relatives
you can interview as well. Ask them for stories about their lives
growing up as well as what their parents and grandparents
were like. Where did they grow up? What did they do for a
living? How did they participate in the major events of the
times? What family traditions did they have? Make sure to
record your interviews so you do not forget anything.
Researching your family history
goes beyond learning about
American heritage. Knowing
about your family’s role in
the history of this country
can teach you about what
American ideals and
traditions are important to
your family—things that
you can proudly pass down
to your own children.
Ask your relatives to show you some old family photographs
and tell you what they remember about the lives of the
relatives pictured.
For more
information about
researching
your family’s
history, read the
Genealogy merit
badge pamphlet.
The resources
listed at the end
of this pamphlet
will give you some
information, too.


24 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Heritage at Home.
Defending Freedom
America’s heritage also has been molded by its citizens in
defense of the liberties they hold dear. Of course, the people
most directly linked to this phase of American heritage
are those who have defended it in conflicts both near and
abroad—our military.
Family Research Resources
There are many genealogical societies and organizations that can help
you in your search. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
operates the Family History Library and more than 4,000 branch librar-
ies called Family History Centers. Their files contain millions of family
names. You can see what kinds of records they have online, and volun-
teers at the centers can help you find the information you are looking
for—just do not ask them to do the research for you.
The American Family Immigration History Center provides infor-
mation about the 22 million passengers and ships’ crews who passed
through New York City’s Ellis Island between 1892 and 1924. For instance,
if you think your great-great-grandmother arrived from Europe sometime
around 1901, chances are that her passenger record is on file. Plugging
in her name at the center’s website may call up her date of arrival, how
old she was, what town and country she came from, her port of depar-
ture, and her marital status.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 25
.Heritage at Home
Talking to military veterans is a great way to learn about
what being an American means to its citizens. You probably
know someone—or know someone who knows someone—who
has served or is serving in the military. These veterans and active
soldiers usually are happy to talk about their experiences defend-
ing the country and its values, whether in wartime or peacetime.
Everyday People
Nonmilitary citizens also have strong feelings about what it
means to be an American. Their views can differ depending
on their ages. Consider what effect growing up in different
time periods will have on citizens. For example, think about
how growing up during one of the following periods of history
would have affected you.
The Great Depression (1929–1939)
When stock market prices plummeted in 1929, many people
were financially ruined. By 1932, about 30 percent of the
workforce was unemployed, and by 1933, almost half of U.S.
banks had failed. Americans learned to be extremely frugal,
saving money as best they could. Many kept their money in
their homes instead of in banks, and many depended heavily
on government programs for help.
Local Veterans
Affairs offices
or Veterans of
Foreign Wars
posts can
recommend a
veteran whom
you could
interview. See
the resources
section at the
end of this
pamphlet for
more information.
Some people lost their homes during the 1930s and lived in
roadside communities that sprang up on the outskirts of many
large cities.


26 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Heritage at Home.
World War II (1941–1945)
When Japanese forces attacked Hawaii’s Pearl Harbor on
December 7, 1941, Americans rallied to defend their country.
America immediately entered World War II, and the U.S. Army
quickly expanded from about 1.6 million soldiers to about
8.3 million. Civilians who traditionally were not part of the
workforce—mostly women and African Americans—took
positions in factories to help support the troops.
Although most of America was united in the war, other
groups were not allowed to participate. For instance, under what
was called national security, many Japanese Americans were
rounded up and held in internment camps. They were basically
prisoners because of their Japanese descent. In recent years, the
U.S. government has made reparations to many of the Japanese
American families who suffered losses during that time.
Advertising campaigns featuring Rosie the Riveter encouraged
women to join the workforce during World War II.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 27
.Heritage at Home
Martin Luther King Jr. called for nonviolent demonstrations in the fight for civil rights.
The Civil Rights Movement (1950s and 1960s)
The civil rights crisis divided the country like no other issue
since the Civil War. In the southern states, African Americans
were not allowed to attend school or eat in restaurants with
whites—even their drinking fountains and restrooms were
separate. Blacks had more freedom in the northern states, but
discrimination still was evident in things like employment and
housing. Civil rights demonstrations often turned violent. Riots
sometimes broke out as leaders on both sides tried to defend
their beliefs. It was not until the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and
the Voting Rights Act of 1965 that serious progress was made
toward equal treatment of the races.
The Korean War (1950–1953)
This war placed many Americans at the forefront of the battle
against communism, as North Korea invaded South Korea.
While America’s presence in the war was short-lived, it was
among the deadliest for American soldiers.
Boom in California (1950s–1960s)
America’s population boomed after World War II, and California
was perhaps affected most. Its cities exploded with new housing
and highways, and many icons of American culture migrated
from New York to Los Angeles. Among the most notable arrivals
to the new West Coast scene were television production studios
and Brooklyn’s beloved baseball team, the Dodgers.


28 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Heritage at Home.
The Space Race
Until 1957, when the Russians launched Sputnik I, the first
space satellite, Americans relied on jet test pilots to reach new
frontiers in flight. Their spirits soared with hope after President
John F. Kennedy’s optimistic promise to land on the moon
by the end of the 1960s. His vision was reached in July 1969,
when Apollo 11 astronauts successfully landed on the moon
and returned to Earth.
Technological Boom
In the ’50s, ’60s, and ’70s, Americans were treated
to technological advances that were designed for
more convenience in their homes. From TV
dinners to live television via satellite,
advancements resulted in more
convenience and immediacy for
the average American.
Astronaut Neil
Armstrong, the
first man to step
on the moon, was
an Eagle Scout.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 29
.Heritage at Home
The 1970s
Americans’ morale seemed to dip during
this decade because of several events. The
Vietnam War grew unpopular as more and
more Americans began to question why
we were fighting. The Watergate scandal
forced President Richard Nixon to resign
after he was accused of covering up a
break-in at his rival’s headquarters. The
country also plunged into a deep reces-
sion, in which prices were high and an oil
shortage forced cars to line up for hours at
gas stations.
Interviewing Tips
If you choose either option 2c or 2d, here are some basic tips to
remember as you plan your interviews.
• When coming up with questions to ask people, start with the five Ws
and H that journalists use to get their story: who, what, when, where,
why, and how. Questions that start with those words will help stir the
memory of the person you are interviewing, and they will help you
think of other interesting questions.
• Ask easy questions first, such as the person’s name, age, and where
they live. This helps them become comfortable as you proceed to
more difficult, thought-provoking questions.
• Form your questions so that the person you are interviewing must
answer with more than “yes” or “no.” An example of such a ques-
tion might be “Tell me why you enjoyed your service in the Navy”
instead of “Did you like your service in the Navy?”
• Ask follow-up questions like “Can you be more specific?” and “Can
you give me an example?”
• Record the interview. (Make sure to get permission from your inter-
view subject first.) Most people talk too fast for you to write down
complete answers, and taping an interview will make sure you do
not miss a thing.


Taken at the U.S. Capitol in Washington, D.C.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 31
.Power of the People
Power of the People
Not all history makers need to be George Washington or Martin
Luther King Jr. While these men certainly left their fingerprints
on American history, many ordinary citizens have made lasting
impressions as well.
Lawyer Francis Scott Key probably had no idea that his
poem would someday become America’s national anthem.
Independence, freedom, and innovativeness are all associated
with the United States, and even the most “average” American
citizens have become known for working to further the ideals
of their country.
From Ordinary to Extraordinary
Our 39th president, Jimmy Carter, may be about the most shining
example of “ordinary to extraordinary.” He was born in 1924 and grew
up in rural Georgia. Carter was educated in the public school system
and later attended Georgia Southwestern College, the Georgia Institute
of Technology, and the U.S. Naval Academy. He also did graduate work
in nuclear physics at Union College in New York.
His father was a farmer and business owner; his mother, a nurse.
In 1953, after his father’s death, Jimmy Carter resigned from his com-
mission with the U.S. Navy to take care of the family business. His
interest in education eventually led him to politics. Carter served as
U.S. president from 1977 to 1981. During that time, his administration
focused on foreign relations, human rights, and environmental issues.
Since leaving office, Carter has continued his service to the public
and to those who are less fortunate. He teaches Sunday school and
does volunteer work for many organizations, among them Habitat
for Humanity.


32 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Power of the People.
The President and the Preacher
Learning about how public and private citizens have changed
history can be as easy as going to the library. Decide what time
period you are interested in, or ask the librarian for a
recommendation, and then head over to the library’s
biography section.
If you choose option 2a, you might consider comparing
two figures from similar times in history, such as President
John F. Kennedy and Martin Luther King Jr. Both men worked
to promote the values of the United States, but each had a
unique approach.
John F. Kennedy
The grandson of a Boston mayor, John Fitzgerald Kennedy had
a heritage of public service. Kennedy planned on becoming a
teacher or a writer after his service in World War II, but when
his politically ambitious brother Joe was killed, John Kennedy
changed his career plans.
Kennedy served three terms in the U.S. House of
Representatives and was later elected to the U.S. Senate. He
professed to represent the values of regular Americans and
pushed for better working conditions, more public housing,
higher wages, and lower prices.
Kennedy understood the power of the people. On the eve
of the 1960 presidential election, he helped release Martin
Luther King Jr. from prison. The resulting support from African
Americans may have helped Kennedy become the youngest
American president.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 33
.Power of the People
As president, Kennedy championed many causes he felt
would strengthen America, including the Peace Corps and
the space program. He supported the civil rights movement,
believing that it was important to show the world that the
best way to live was in a free and democratic society such
as America. Yet during this time, African Americans were
not really free.
Kennedy was worried that activists’ protests and dem-
onstrations would anger white people and create resistance
toward civil rights legislation. After many Americans viewed
a violent protest on television news, Kennedy addressed the
nation about the civil rights crisis. “This nation was founded
by men of many nations and backgrounds,” he said. “It was
founded on the principle that all men are created equal, and
that the rights of every man are diminished when the rights of
one man are threatened.”
Soon after, Kennedy started gathering support from both
Democrats and Republicans for a civil rights program. The pro-
posed legislation was making rounds through Congress when
Kennedy was assassinated on November 22, 1963. It would be
up to his replacement, Lyndon Baines Johnson, to usher the
civil rights bill into law.
In his inaugural speech in January 1961, President Kennedy implored Americans:
“Ask not what your country can do for you—ask what you can do for your country.”


34 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Power of the People.
Martin Luther King Jr.
Growing up in the South, Martin Luther King Jr. thought the
separation of races was normal. As a young adult, he visited
Connecticut, where he saw blacks and whites eating together
and attending the same church. This was how America was
supposed to be, he thought.
King studied law and medicine in college but ultimately
decided to follow in his father’s footsteps, entering public
service through the ministry. An eloquent speaker, King could
help his church members spiritually, but he also could inspire
them to demand equality.
King’s first test came in 1955,
when he was chosen to lead bus boy-
cotts in Montgomery, Alabama, after
Rosa Parks refused to give up her seat
to a white man. King was only 26 years
old, but he inspired African Americans
to stop riding on buses until the city’s
buses were desegregated a year later.
Realizing the power that ordinary
people could have over discrimination,
King began working toward a mass
movement for civil rights. Forming
the Southern Christian Leadership
Conference, he began speaking all over
the country. He called for nonviolent
protests. Although he encouraged legal
action from the government, he did
not believe the government was doing enough. “Nonviolence
can touch men where the law cannot reach them,” he said.
King’s work was dangerous. He was arrested many times.
His house and church were bombed. One time he was even
stabbed. But he believed that his sacrifices were necessary to
show how much he believed in what America could be.
In perhaps the most wide-reaching demonstration, King and
other civil rights leaders organized the March on Washington.
On August 28, 1963, Americans watched on TV as more than
200,000 people—both blacks and whites—peacefully came
together to demand equal rights for all races. Soon most of the
country supported a strong civil rights law, and the Civil Rights
Act of 1964 was passed. The Voting Rights Act was passed a
year later.
Rosa Parks’ refusal to give up her bus seat
to a white man helped spark the beginning
of the civil rights movement.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 35
.Power of the People
In 1968, King was assassinated in Tennessee. However, the
civil rights movement has continued.
King and Kennedy both answered a call to service: Kennedy
in the military and politics, King in the ministry. They both
were powerful speakers and knew how to use the medium of
television to their advantage. Both men had definite ideas of
how America should be. In a sense, it was the same America,
one where everyone had equal opportunities to succeed and
be free. But they had different ways of achieving their goals.
Kennedy wanted to use the law. King wanted to mobilize the
people. Both methods worked. In fact, both methods probably
were necessary to achieve the ultimate goal of racial equality.
During the March on Washington in 1963, Martin Luther King Jr. delivered his famous
“I have a dream” speech, saying, “I have a dream that my four children will one day
live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of their skin but by the
content of their character.”


36 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Power of the People.
Ordinary People Who Made a Difference
Clara Barton (1821–1912). “Angel of the Civil War battle-
field” and founder of the American Red Cross.
César Chávez (1927–1993). Helped organize a union of
Hispanic and Filipino farm workers in 1962.
Frederick Douglass (1817–1895). Born a slave and
became the first black man to stand boldly against
slavery in America.
Bob Hope (1903–2003). Comedian and actor who
entertained several generations, including U.S. sol-
diers overseas in service to their country.
Barbara Jordan (1936–1996). Powerful orator and the
first African American woman elected to the Texas Senate
(1966) and U.S. House of Representatives (1972).
Helen Keller (1880–1968). Education reformer, lecturer, and
writer who lost her sight and hearing at age 19 months.
Thurgood Marshall (1908–1993). The first African
American justice to sit on the U.S. Supreme Court.
Thomas Paine (1737–1809). English-born philosopher
whose pamphlet Common Sense argued for complete
American independence from Britain.
Sally K. Ride (1951–2012). The first American woman
in space, as a crewmember of the space shuttle
Challenger in 1983.
Jackie Robinson (1919–1972). African American base-
ball player whose athletic prowess and determination
helped break the color barrier in major-league sports.
Sam Walton (1918–1992). Businessman and entrepre-
neur whose centralized distribution system allowed
his stores to buy high volumes of brand-name goods
and sell them at discount prices.
Tiger Woods (1975– ). Multiracial professional golfer
whose exceptional play has made him the youngest
player ever to reach such heights in the sport.
Frederick Douglass
Jackie Robinson
Thomas Paine


AMERICAN HERITAGE 37
.Power of the People
Join Up
The actions of many people working toward a common goal can
make a huge difference. Millions of Americans helped the Civil
Rights Act of 1964 come to fruition. Each individual contributed
in some way.
That is why people often join organizations. They have
an issue that is important to them. They want to work with
other people who feel the same way so that they can make a
difference in American society. They may work to help a local
political candidate get elected. They may volunteer to teach
children to read. They may help organize marathons to raise
money for disease research. Or they may write letters to gov-
ernment leaders to urge them to vote a certain way.
It sometimes is hard to see how one person can make a
difference. But one person working with other people toward a
common cause can truly lead to changes. One example is the
National Audubon Society. Because of the efforts of thousands
of people, American wildlife has a better chance of survival.
In 1886, George Grinnell, the editor of Forest and Stream
magazine, asked his readers to sign a pledge promising not to
hurt birds. When about 40,000 people agreed, the Audubon
Society for the Protection of Birds was founded. Membership
grew so quickly that Grinnell was unable to keep pace with the
growth. Ten years later, the Massachusetts Audubon Society
was started when cousins Harriet Hemenway and Mirna Hall
urged people to stop wearing feathered hats in order to halt
the killing of birds. Soon people in more and more states were
forming organizations under the name of the Audubon Society.
By 1901, a national organization, the National
Committee of Audubon Societies—now known as the
National Audubon Society—was born, with the pur-
pose of protecting native birds and other wildlife.
In 1901, the Florida Audubon Society discovered
a colony of brown pelicans—the last of their
kind—on the east coast of Florida. The society
began a campaign to protect the pelicans.
Two years later, President Theodore Roosevelt
named Pelican Island as the first National
Wildlife Refuge.
National Audubon
Society members
believe that the
United States
always has had a
special relation-
ship with its land.
They believe that
protecting and
conserving the
land and the crea-
tures that live on
it helps preserve
our American
heritage.





AMERICAN HERITAGE 39
.Your Friendly, Neighborhood Heritage
Your Friendly,
Neighborhood Heritage
Let’s say you live in Stillwater, Oklahoma, the home of
Oklahoma State University. Researching the town’s history will
show you that the town started during the 1889 Oklahoma land
rush, in which the government opened up Indian Territory to
white settlers. The new settlement stood between two creeks
but was miles from any railroad, which could bring in supplies
and people, so the settlers lobbied for a new land-grant col-
lege to help increase the area’s importance. In 1890, Oklahoma
A&M College (now OSU) was founded. Without the college,
the town of Stillwater might have disappeared—and you would
be living somewhere else.
Learning about your town’s history can bring American
heritage alive by showing you how your life today has been
affected by the past. Important questions can come up as you
research your town’s history. For instance, in the Stillwater
example, you may wonder what industry developed in the town
to make it successful, what happened to the American Indians
who were displaced when white settlers rushed in, or whether
African Americans, who were no longer slaves but often not
granted the same rights as whites, were allowed to claim land.
Finding the answers to thoughts like these will help you under-
stand what your town was like when it began—and who
contributed to its history.
Town Secrets
Your local library is a great place to find informa-
tion about your town’s history. The library can
provide you with books written by local historians
or files of other historical resources.
Knowing how the Dust Bowl era might have affected
your town is part of understanding its history.


40 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Your Friendly, Neighborhood Heritage.
Most libraries also have archives of the local newspaper
on microfilm that often date back to the town’s founding.
These old newspapers can introduce the town’s founders and
the circumstances around the town’s beginning, and they can
describe historical events that affected the town.
For instance, the Great Depression of the 1930s affected
the entire country but particularly farmers. In Oklahoma, the
Dust Bowl ruined many crops and forced farmers westward
toward California. This phenomenal disaster lasted about a
decade and helped lengthen the Depression and its devastat-
ing effects. Reading accounts of those hard times can help you
research how the Dust Bowl might have affected your town.
State and local historical societies can help you uncover
more local history, and most towns also have a city museum
dedicated to preserving the heritage of the place where you
live. Plugging the state historical society’s name into your web
browser might lead you to a list of historical sites in your area.
To begin your historical research, visit your local museum or library.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 41
.Your Friendly, Neighborhood Heritage
These sites also can tell you if your city or county has its own
historical society.
Census records have lots of statistics about the people in
your town. These records can give you current numbers for
population, sex, race, age, and many other facts. Start your
research by visiting the website of the U.S. Census Bureau.
(See the resources section for more information.)
Census records for past statistics are often archived at
your local library. You can check with your federal depository
library, too. The Federal Depository Library Program collects
information from all three branches of the government and
distributes it to the public for free. Almost every congressional
district has one. You can visit the program’s website to find all
the libraries in your state that have been designated as federal
depositories. (See the resources section for more information.)
There should be one near you, but call first to make sure the
library has the information you are seeking.
Internet research is fast and fun, but be sure you have permission to go online.


42 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Your Friendly, Neighborhood Heritage.
Registered History
When you think of San Francisco, California, what comes
to mind? You might think of the infamous Alcatraz Island,
where the country’s most notorious criminals were once held.
There is a good chance you would think of the cable cars
that—without engines—amazingly maneuver the city’s hills.
But you probably would not take particular notice of the Bank
of Italy on Montgomery Street. Started by the son of Italian
immigrants in 1904, the bank helped to rebuild San Francisco
after the Great Earthquake of 1906. Today, you might know it
as Bank of America.
These sites are important
to our American heritage, and
they are listed on the National
Register of Historic Places.
Authorized under the National
Historic Preservation Act of 1966,
the register coordinates and sup-
ports efforts to identify, evaluate,
and protect historic and archaeo-
logical resources.
Alcatraz Island
A San Francisco cable car


AMERICAN HERITAGE 43
.Your Friendly, Neighborhood Heritage
The National Register does not list all historic properties.
There are very specific criteria for a property to be listed. Above
all, the property must be significant in American history, archi-
tecture, archaeology, and culture. The property also must be
one of the following.
• It must be associated with events that have contributed
significantly to American heritage.
• It must be associated with important people in
American heritage.
• It must represent characteristics of a type, period, or method
of construction; be the work of a respected artist; or have
artistic value.
• It must have the potential to result in important historical
(or prehistorical) information.
Generally, birthplaces and grave sites of famous people,
as well as properties that are less than 50 years old, are not
eligible unless they are architecturally valuable or no other
appropriate site can be associated with that person.
With more than 77,000 listings, there is a good chance a
property in your town is listed on the National Register. You
can enter your town’s name (or your county’s name, if you
live in a small town) on the National Register’s website to find
out what properties are there. See the resources section at the
end of this pamphlet.
Mapping It Out. Once you have found
what National Register properties are
in your area, plot them on a map.
Your map does not have to be exact,
but it should identify major streets,
highways, and natural resources such
as lakes and rivers. Your local library,
chamber of commerce, or realty office
might be able to provide you with a
map of your town. Your city’s website
also may have a link to a map you
can print out; just plug in the town
and state name in your browser to
begin the search.


44 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Your Friendly, Neighborhood Heritage.
Celebrating History
Most towns and cities have plenty
of events to celebrate history.
By participating in those
events, you can learn why
these events are significant.
(You probably will have
fun doing them, too.)
Look for events sur-
rounding local heritage,
such as Mardi Gras
in New Orleans or the
return of the swallows to
Capistrano, California.
Take a Hike
One way to explore all this history yourself is to take a hike on a historic
trail near where you live. For information about the Scouting America
Historic Trails Award, go to scouting.org/awards/awards-central/historic-
trails/. There you will find a fillable PDF application.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 45
.Your Friendly, Neighborhood Heritage
Many towns and cities celebrate local historical events
and people. There may be a battlefield in your area that allows
people to participate in reenactments. Public ceremonies often
are held at famous grave sites, such as George Washington’s
burial place at Mount Vernon, Virginia. Smaller towns might
have a Founders Day celebration, where parades and festivals
mark the anniversary of the town’s beginning. Some states
celebrate an Admissions Day, the day that the state was
admitted into the union.
Check out your town’s community calen-
dar for listings of events. Many organizations—
such as the library, chamber of commerce,
newspaper, or city hall—let people add their
events to the calendar. You also can plug in
your town’s name and the words “community
calendar” into an internet search engine.
Talk with officials from your local city
museum or historical society to see if they
can suggest upcoming events, such as plays
or shows about local history produced by
your local theater group.
Some festivities
are celebrated
regionally. For
instance, many
African Americans
celebrate
Juneteenth (June
19), the day in
1865 when slaves
in Galveston,
Texas, learned
that the Civil War
was over.
Many towns sponsor fireworks shows to celebrate the 4th of July.
George
Washington’s
tomb at Mount
Vernon, Virginia





AMERICAN HERITAGE 47
.History Like You Have Never Seen—or Heard
History Like You Have
Never Seen—or Heard
Ever since 1891, when Thomas Edison received a patent
for his motion-picture camera, the United States has
been a leader in the motion-picture industry. Movies
can reflect who we are as a country. They can show
the best of America, and they can show the worst
of America. They can tell stories about real events,
and they can show what life was like during a
certain time period.
Movies that deal with history should be
watched carefully. Directors sometimes have a cer-
tain point of view they want to get across to their
audience. They may portray characters and events
negatively or positively so that the audience feels a certain
way about the subject.
For instance, many American Indians were portrayed as
villains in “spaghetti” Westerns—popular, low-budget films of
the 1960s that were financed by Italian companies. This may
have been because of prejudice on the part of moviemakers, or
simply to show the white characters as more heroic.
Other historical movies may add information that never
really happened. Often this is to make the movie more
exciting (at least, according to the director). A historical movie
sometimes can sway the audience simply because of what
it leaves out. It is up to you to research and find out what
actually happened.
Thomas
Edison
It’s not possible to fit the whole story into a movie. If
you want to know the full story, you may want to do
some additional research and reading.


48 AMERICAN HERITAGE
History Like You Have Never Seen—or Heard.
History on Film
Period Title (Rating) Year
American Revolution/
Colonial Times
1776 (G) 1972
Johnny Tremaine (NR) 1957
Civil War Lincoln (PG-13) 2012
Buffalo Soldiers (PG) 1997
Gettysburg (PG) 1993
The Civil War (NR) 1990
The Red Badge of Courage (NR) 1951
Gone With the Wind (G) 1939
The Old West Dances With Wolves (PG-13) 1990
Lonesome Dove (NR) 1989
Gunfight at the O.K. Corral (NR) 1957
World War I A Farewell to Arms (NR) 1957
Sergeant York (NR) 1941
All Quiet on the Western Front (NR) 1930
The Great
Depression
The Journey of Natty Gann (PG) 1985
Sounder (G) 1972
To Kill a Mockingbird (NR) 1962
The Grapes of Wrath (NR) 1940
World War II The Tuskegee Airmen (PG-13) 1995
Memphis Belle (PG-13) 1990
Tora! Tora! Tora! (G) 1970
The Longest Day (NR) 1962
Sands of Iwo Jima (NR) 1949
The Best Years of Our Lives (NR) 1946
The 1950s La Bamba (PG-13) 1987
Rebel Without a Cause (NR) 1955
The Space Race October Sky (PG) 1999
Apollo 13 (PG) 1995
The Right Stuff (PG) 1983
Civil Rights and
Tolerance
42 (PG-13) 2013
The Help (PG-13) 2011
Ghosts of Mississippi (PG-13) 1996
Corrina, Corrina (PG) 1994
The Long Walk Home (PG) 1990
King (NR) 1978
The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman (NR) 1974


AMERICAN HERITAGE 49
.History Like You Have Never Seen—or Heard
Mark Carnes, the editor of Past Imperfect: History According
to the Movies, probably gives the best advice about learning
history from film. In a television interview, he said, “What I
should do whenever I go to a movie, or whenever anyone goes
to a movie, is enjoy it … and not believe a word.” And then,
he advises, read about the history.
Listen Up
What are you listening to right now? Is it the hot new single
on the radio? An elder’s favorite golden oldie? Or your little
sister’s or brother’s kid tunes? No matter what you are
listening to, someone is probably trying to tell you something.


50 AMERICAN HERITAGE
History Like You Have Never Seen—or Heard.
That is the way American music has been since the first
settlers set foot on American soil. Music today is a lot like music
of yesterday. Songs are basically about emotion. Singers express
feelings of love, spirituality, patriotism, and life in general.
It is not always possible to fully understand the meaning
of a song unless you personally ask the songwriter—and most of
the time that is impossible. And songs are often open to many
different interpretations. But if you read the lyrics closely, there
are ways you can make certain assumptions.
• Find out when the song was written. Was there an impor-
tant event going on at the time that may have influenced
the song? What was the mood of the country like at the
time? Were people patriotic in a time of war, or were they
rebellious in a time of protest?
• Find out who wrote the song. What was the author’s ethnic
background? Is the author male or female? Young or old?
How would what was going on in the country at the time
the song was written affect the writer?
• Was the song written with someone in mind? Is there a
particular audience the songwriter intended to reach? Is the
songwriter sharing similar thoughts and feelings, or trying
to convince others who may disagree that his or her view is
the correct one?
• What words or phrases are repeated? Often these hooks are
important to the writer and may have special meaning.
• Why was the song written? Was it to remind Americans to
value their freedom? Was it to express pride in the strength
of the nation?
• How would people with different backgrounds interpret
the song?
Many CDs include the written lyrics of popular songs. You
may own the CD, or your public library may have it available.
Often these lyrics are online as well. Just plug in the name of
the song and the word “lyrics” into your web browser. Music
stores can be another good source of sheet music with lyrics.
Your local library may have songbooks and sheet music on file.
Older song lyrics
can be found
online. The web
addresses of
some collection
sites are included
in the resources
section. Be
sure you have
your parent or
guardian’s
permission
whenever you
go online.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 51
.History Like You Have Never Seen—or Heard
Songs of the Times
Colonial Times (mid- to late 1700s). Most people sang hymns, but as
independence loomed, American songwriters began comparing bibli-
cal struggles with struggles against Britain. Songs also told about cur-
rent events—such as a new settlement or a battle victory. “The Liberty
Song,” written by Revolutionary War hero John Dickinson, was a song
of the times.
Slavery. Many songs sung by slaves helped them keep rhythm while
they were working. The songs often were about brutality and injustice,
but no one but the slaves could tell. Often they were singing in front of
their masters, so they had to hide the true meaning of their words. For
example, “Go Down, Moses” recalls a story from the Christian Bible
about the Hebrews held in bondage in Egypt.
Pre–Civil War (early to mid-1800s). Songs about social reform became
popular and warned people about the dangers of drinking and the
immorality of slavery. “Buffalo Gals,” written by John Hodges and John
Lomax, was popular in minstrel shows.
Civil War (1861–1865). Songs fueled patriotism on both sides of the
battle. The songs tried to show why one side deserved to win or
expressed vengeance against the enemy. “The Battle Hymn of the
Republic” is a song from that era that is still sung today.
Post–Civil War (late 1800s). Songs often reflected America’s westward
movement. Cowboys, miners, loggers, and homesteaders—both the
white settlers and the Spanish people already there—were popular
themes. “I’ve Been Working on the Railroad” and “Clementine” are
tunes you might recognize.
Early 20th Century. One style of music reflected the consciousness of the
new arrivals to America. As immigrants flooded into America, citizens
struggled to find a national identity, so patriotic songs once again became
popular. Another style of the era came from African Americans, who were
no longer slaves but still faced discrimination and continued to sing
about hardships. This style of music was called the blues. Still other
styles of music in the early 20th century, such as ragtime and jazz,
reflected the prosperity and lifestyles of the time.


52 AMERICAN HERITAGE
History Like You Have Never Seen—or Heard.
The Great Depression (1929 through early 1930s). United in poverty and
hardship, people in this era wrote songs that reflected the shared expe-
riences of life during the Depression. The title of “Dust Bowl Blues”
sums up the music of the era.
World War II. Patriotic songs again were on the rise, as well as songs
that reflected American values to keep up people’s spirits while soldiers
were overseas. The swinging tune of “Boogie Woogie Bugle Boy” kept
toes tapping on all fronts.
1950s. A new breed
of Americans was
on the rise: the
teenager. Teens
struggled to find
their own identity,
separate from their
parents, without
the restrictions of
an earlier age. The
result? Rebellious
rock and roll.
Teens in the
1950s at the hop


.History Like You Have Never Seen—or Heard
Vietnam War. The generation gap between young and old grew even
wider as the war continued. In protest, many songs lashed out against
adult authority.
1970s. The aftershock of the 1960s produced songs that echoed cultural
awareness in the early 1970s. As profits replaced the message as the
focal point of popular music, songs no longer held deep social meaning.
1980s. FM radio and the music video expanded popular music’s reach,
exposing listeners to a variety of genres. Songs were more about
having fun and some of the lighter aspects of life. Country music,
meanwhile, experienced a comeback that produced a crossover effect
in popular music. Songs, of course, were generally about relationships
and lost love.
1990s. The early 1990s saw the advent of grunge rock, a movement
that returned popular music to its folk roots. The song lyrics, however,
focused on despair and social inequality. The influence of rap and hip-
hop music spread, exposing America to the despair of urban youth.
21st century. While the music industry continued to rely on dance and
hip-hop music to appeal to its youngest listeners, groups from as far
back as the 1960s were making comebacks with hopeful messages—
much like decades before. Country music, with its appeal to conservative
American values, is grabbing a fair share of the audience.
For more information on how music helped
shape eras of American history, see the Music
and Bugling merit badge pamphlet. MUSIC AND
BUGLING





AMERICAN HERITAGE 55
.Extra! Extra!
Extra! Extra!
A current event is a topic that is covered in the news right now.
It could be an election, an environmental issue, or a war. It could
be a study that compares, for example, the grades of students
from different ethnic groups, which prompts change in the edu-
cation system. It also could be a trend; perhaps inflated prices
are easing up or the stock market is enjoying an upward trend.
Current events do not just happen. They are the results of
many events affecting each other. When you read about a cur-
rent event, you should think about what caused the event and
how it affects not just the people involved, but you as well.
For instance, maybe a tornado has blown through the
Midwest, causing millions of dollars worth of damage to build-
ings and farms. Of course, a tornado itself is not caused by
anything but nature. But why was there so much damage?
Did the building codes go back to the Civil War era and were
therefore outdated? Had the area been a farming community
since Colonial times? If so, what will the farmers do now?
And how does this affect you? Will your town now take
another look at its building codes?
Time Lines
One way to help you understand about the historical causes
of an event is to make a time line. A time line can show you
how one event caused another event that caused another
event, and so on.
For instance, President Kennedy’s vision of putting a man
on the moon didn’t happen overnight, nor did it stop there.
Many events over several decades set the action in motion,
leading up to today, when scientists can place a robot on Mars
to send pictures back to Earth.


56 AMERICAN HERITAGE
Extra! Extra!.
Space Race: A Time Line
1957. The Soviet Union launches Sputnik I, the first
Earth-orbiting satellite. A year later, the United States
countered, launching a satellite of its own.
1958. The United States forms the National Aeronautics
and Space Administration—the federal agency dedicated
to exploring space.
1961. Both the United States and Russia send a man
into space for the first time. In 1963, Russian Valentina
Tereshkova becomes the first woman in space.
1965. Ed White becomes the first American to walk in space.
1968. The United States launches the first manned mission
that orbits the moon.
1969. U.S. astronauts Neil Armstrong
and Buzz Aldrin land the Apollo 11
lunar module on the surface of
the moon.
1973. The United States employs
rocket technology to launch Skylab,
its first space station.
1975. American astronauts and
Russian cosmonauts rendezvous in
space and dock their ships together
to complete joint experiments.
1981. The United States opens a new era in space flight with
the launch of the first space shuttle.
1986. The first phase of the Mir space station is launched into
Earth’s orbit.
1990. The Hubble Space Telescope is launched.
1997. The Mars Pathfinder probe lands on the surface
of Mars and sends back images of the planet’s surface.
2001. The Near Earth Asteroid Rendezvous (NEAR)
spacecraft lands on the surface of the asteroid Eros.
2010. The construction of the International Space
Station is largely complete.
2012. The Mars Science Laboratory spacecraft—with
its rover Curiosity—lands on Mars.
1957
1969
2001


AMERICAN HERITAGE 57
.Extra! Extra!
Where to Find Current Events
Current events are easy to find. Read newspapers and
newsmagazines, watch television news programs, and
listen to radio news shows to find out what stories
people think are important. You will find that newspa-
pers and newsmagazines often provide more informa-
tion, details, and background about a current event
because they have the space to do so. TV is great for
finding out what is going on, but most of the time,
local news programs have only a few minutes to
report a story.
Fair and Balanced
Sometimes news stories will present the facts in a
way that reflects the reporter’s opinion. This is called bias and
usually is not intentional, but you should watch for certain
signs that a news report may not be as balanced as it could be.
Headlines. Headlines can be misleading or express an opinion.
The sports headline “Titans Clobbered” basically means the
same thing as “Titans Put Up Good Fight,” that the Titans lost
a game. But the first headline puts the Titans in a more negative
light than the second.
Word choices. A report says that a controversial speaker is
interrupted by “loud audience outbursts,” when it also could
have said “a handful of protestors.” Do you think the reporter
wants to show that people really objected to the speaker, or
that objections are not important?
Placement. Is the story on the front page or way in the back?
Where the editor has placed the story reflects how important
he or she feels the story is.
Sources. Does the reporter talk to an equal number of experts
on both sides of the story? Or is there just one opinion from
one side of the issue versus three opinions from the other side?
That can be a sign that the reporter feels a certain way about
the story.
Titles. How does the reporter refer to the person he or she is
interviewing? Calling someone a “militant activist” has a differ-
ent tone than a “person who disagrees with the government.”
With your parent
or guardian’s
permission,
search the
internet for more
information
about current
events. Note that
foreign news
sites, such as the
BBC, can often
provide a different
perspective to
American issues.





AMERICAN HERITAGE 59
.Careers in American Heritage
Careers in
American Heritage
The great thing about careers in American heritage is that there
is a position out there for just about anyone. Employers are
looking for people who can think independently, communicate
well, have good research skills, and can analyze situations to
relate them to the task at hand. Studying American heritage
gives you these skills and makes you a sought-after candidate.
Most people who want to work in American heritage
major in history in college. Some positions require a master’s
or doctorate degree, especially if you want to teach. You also
might consider being a museum curator, national park ranger,
historic preservation officer, or archivist. These fields require
knowledge of a specific part of history.
Other fields may not relate directly to history but to skills
learned while studying.
• Many lawyers have an undergraduate degree in history
because knowledge of history is necessary to understand
America’s legal system.
• Journalists must be able to translate what someone has
said or done into something the rest of us can understand.
They also need to be able to find information, which
requires research skills. You learn both these skills while
studying history.
• The federal, state, and local governments often look for
employees who do not have a particular specialty. They
want people who can think critically, communicate, and
understand how the American government works. Learning
about history gives you those skills.


60 AMERICAN HERITAGE
The American Dream.
The American Dream
You have read about the contributions of many people, from
the colonists to your peers of today. People immigrate to the
United States from all over the globe for religious freedom,
equal opportunity, education, and economic prosperity, among
many of the freedoms some of us might take for granted.
Immigrants from around the world have heard the
promise of the American dream and come here to pursue it.
The term “American dream” was first used by James Truslow
Adams in his 1931 book The Epic of America. Adams defines
the American dream as “a land in which life should be better
and richer and fuller for everyone, with opportunity for each
according to ability or achievement.” The American dream
includes all those things we hold dear, from going to the
movies to hearing the cheers of a high school football game
to reading the Sunday comics.
What is it that makes America so attractive? Being
American means that we can make many choices. We can
choose where we live, what we do for a living, how we
entertain ourselves, and even when we
want a turkey sandwich for lunch. Not all
peoples of the world have the freedom to
make such choices.
The offer of freedom to the world’s people
is enticing. Our freedom began as a vision in
the minds and hearts of the colonists, and it
has flourished. Every generation of Americans
has fought to protect that freedom against
those who have tried to take it away—in world
wars, cold wars, and wars on terrorism. Our
heritage is how we as Americans got here,
and understanding our ancestors’ actions of
yesterday is the first step to continuing the
dream for generations to come.
James Truslow
Adams theorizes
that anyone in our
culture can rise
to great heights,
depending on how
much work he or
she is willing to
put into it.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 61
.The American Dream
The American Dreamers
American dreamers come from all walks of life, and they all
have something special to share about why they hold this
country and American heritage so dear. The following excerpts
come from the Academy of Achievement, a nonprofit organi-
zation that is “dedicated to the education and inspiration of
youth” through its Museum of the American Dream, which
features “leaders who have shaped the modern world.” Visit
the Academy’s website at achievement.org to learn more about
these extraordinary individuals.
“This is a nation whose spoken and written vision is chill-
ingly beautiful. That each should have an opportunity. That
work will get you where you need to be. That we need to respect
each other, including our differences. That’s a mighty vision;
it’s a precious way to talk about the American democracy.”
—Johnnetta B. Cole, Ph.D., past president, Spelman College
“In other countries, when you try and fail, you really fail.
People really basically look at you as a failure. Here, people look
at that as an excellent experience. … Only in the United States,
people take that kind of attitude that we all need to take a risk.
If it doesn’t work out, at least I was brave enough that I did
try it.”
—Jeong H. Kim, Ph.D., entrepreneur from Korea
“The American Dream … represents a responsibility
to share it, and to not just sort of hoard that freedom,
but hopefully share that freedom with other countries.”
—Maya Lin, designer of the Vietnam Veterans Memorial
“I think the American Dream should be to have a good life,
and to live well, and to be a good citizen. I think that should
apply to all of us. That it is the land of the free and the home
of the brave, and I believe it should be just that for all people.”
—Rosa Parks, civil rights leader


62 AMERICAN HERITAGE
American Heritage Resources.
Scouting Literature
American Business, American
Cultures, American Labor, Citizenship
in the Community, Citizenship in
the Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Genealogy, Journalism, Law, and
Scouting Heritage merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bjornlund, Lydia. The U.S. Constitution:
Blueprint for Democracy. Lucent
Books Inc., 1999.
Carnes, Mark, ed. Past Imperfect:
History According to the Movies.
Holt and Company, 1995.
Finlayson, Reggie, ed. We Shall
Overcome: The History of the
American Civil Rights Movement.
Lerner Publishing Group, 2002.
Freedman, Russell. Give Me Liberty!
The Story of the Declaration of
Independence. Holiday House, 2002.
Hoose, Phillip M. We Were There, Too!:
Young People in U.S. History. Farrar,
Straus, and Giroux, 2001.
Jaffe, Steven H. Who Were the
Founding Fathers? Two Hundred
Years of Reinventing American
History. Henry Holt and Co., 1996.
Kassinger, Ruth. U.S. Census: A Mirror
of America. Raintree Steck-Vaughn
Publishers, 2000.
McIntire, Suzanne, ed. American
Heritage Book of Great American
Speeches for Young People.
Wiley, 2001.
Panchyk, Richard. Keys to American
History: Understanding Our Most
Important Historic Documents.
Chicago Review Press, 2009.
Time Magazine editors. Time America:
An Illustrated History. Time, 2007.
Torricelli, Robert, and Andrew
Carroll, eds. In Our Own Words:
Extraordinary Speeches of the
American Century. Kodansha
International, 1999.
Wilson, Richard Guy, ed. A Guide to
Popular U.S. Landmarks as Listed
in the National Register of Historic
Places. Franklin Watts Inc., 2003.
Zeinert, Karen. Free Speech: From
Newspapers to Music Lyrics. Enslow
Publishers, 1995.
American Heritage Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


AMERICAN HERITAGE 63
.American Heritage Resources
Periodicals
American History and
Civil War Times
historynet.com
Early American Life
Telephone: 440-543-8566
firelandsmedia.com
Preservation
Telephone: 202-588-6388
savingplaces.org/preservation-magazine
Organizations and Websites
Academy of Achievement
achievement.org
America Singing: 19th Century
Song Sheets
loc.gov/collections/nineteenth-century-
song-sheets/about-this-collection
America’s Library
loc.gov/item/2020600735
The American Family Immigration
History Center
Telephone: 212-561-4588
statueofliberty.org/ellis-island/family-
history-center/
American Memory
loc.gov/item/lcwaN0018882
American Veterans (AMVETS)
Toll-free telephone: 877-726-8387
amvets.org
Family Search Internet
Genealogy Service
familysearch.org
Federal Depository Library Program
fdlp.gov
Genealogy.com
genealogy.com
The Lester S. Levy Sheet
Music Collection
Johns Hopkins University
levysheetmusic.mse.jhu.edu
Library of Congress
Telephone: 202-707-5000
loc.gov
National Constitution Center
Telephone: 215-409-6600
constitutioncenter.org
National Park Service
Telephone: 202-208-6843
nps.gov
National Register of Historic Places
Telephone: 202-354-2211
nps.gov/subjects/nationalregister/
national-register-forms.htm
Smithsonian Institution
Telephone: 202-633-1000
si.edu
U.S. Census Bureau
Telephone: 301-763-4636
census.gov
U.S. History.org
ushistory.org/us/
Veterans of Foreign Wars (VFW)
vfw.org
The White House
Telephone: 202-456-1414
whitehouse.gov


64 AMERICAN HERITAGE
American Heritage Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Darryl
Hamson for his time, assistance, and
expertise in updating this edition of
the American Heritage merit badge
pamphlet. Mr. Hamson is a former
costumed interpreter at Colonial
Williamsburg in Williamsburg,
Virginia, the largest living history
museum in America.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
America’s Library, courtesy—pages 8
(W.E.B. DuBois), 19, 34, 35, and 36
(Jackie Robinson)
Stephen Hernandez, courtesy—
page 52 (both)
JFK Library, courtesy—page 33
Krause Publications, Iola, Wisconsin,
and Stack’s Rare Coins, New York,
New York, courtesy—page 17 (quarter)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
pages 14, 18 (Francis Scott Key),
22, 25, 29, 36 (Thomas Paine), 39,
and 47
NASA, courtesy—pages 28 (moonwalk)
and 56 (all)
National Archives and Records
Administration, courtesy—pages 8
(Martin Luther King Jr.) and 27
National Park Service, Frederick
Douglass National Historic Site,
courtesy—page 36
(Frederick Douglass)
Wikimedia Commons, courtesy—pages
11 and 15 (Stars and Stripes)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 12
(both), 26, and 42 (cable car)
Wikipedia.org/Harald Klinke, cour-
tesy—page 45 (Washington’s tomb)
Wikipedia.org/Dan Smith, courtesy—
page 28 (TV dinner)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting
America.
David Burke—page 24
Tom Copeland Jr.—cover (colonist);
pages 4, 9, 43, and 44 (Scout with
reenactor)