ARCHAEOLOGY
STEM-Based


ARCHAEOLOGY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Archaeology or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35855
ISBN 978-0-8395-5000-6
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
FPO


ARCHAEOLOGY 3


4 ARCHAEOLOGY


ARCHAEOLOGY 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Who Are Archaeologists? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Archaeology and Responsibility . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
The Development of Archaeology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
How Archaeology Happens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Dig This . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Careers in Archaeology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Archaeology in the Future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Archaeology Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90


6 ARCHAEOLOGY
Introduction
How do you keep track of important events in your life? Maybe
your family takes photos or videos. Perhaps you keep a
journal. Some people hold onto ticket stubs and programs from
games and performances they attend.
But how can we know anything about the lives of people
who didn’t keep records like these? How can we investigate
what life was like for people who lived before writing was
invented or for people who never learned how to write? What
about people who kept records that have been destroyed? How
can we learn anything about them?
We know that people usually document and memorialize
special occasions in their lives. How can we reconstruct
people’s everyday lives—the normal stuff, the things they
wouldn’t choose to record?
People’s diaries often don’t
tell us anything
about what they
ate each day, what
they wore, what
they used for
transportation,
and so on.
Everyone who
has ever lived has
left something
behind—from entire
buildings to
garbage to their
own skeletons. Any
of these things can
teach us about
the past. We can
study ancient
architecture, trash,
Introduction.


ARCHAEOLOGY 7
.Introduction
and human remains to learn about people who didn’t keep
written records and about what written records leave out.
This is exactly what archaeology is all about: studying the
things people have left behind to give us a fuller and more
accurate understanding of people’s experiences in the past.
Usually, these objects are broken, incomplete, or damaged. An
archaeologist’s job is to look at the tiny fragments of things
from the past in order to reconstruct how people used to live,
feel, work, love, and die.
Archaeology has taught us about native people who lived
in North America thousands of years ago and about people
who escaped slavery less than 200 years ago. Archaeology has
been used to solve crimes and to help cities in rebuilding after
natural disasters. Archaeologists work all around the world.
They excavate sites, they maintain museums, they teach in
universities, and they collaborate with governments. Most of
all, they work to ensure that no one’s story is forgotten just
because it wasn’t written down. What stories from the past do
you want to help discover, rescue, and revive?





ARCHAEOLOGY 9
.Who Are Archaeologists?
Who Are
Archaeologists?
Archaeologists are scientists who study how people lived in the
past. They figure out what happened, when, how, and why.
Using the clues that people left behind, they try to understand
how and why human culture has changed through time.
Archaeologists do their work, in part, because they want to
satisfy their curiosity. Like all of us, archaeologists love to find
out about other people, other places, and other times. We all
benefit from their studies because archaeologists like to share
their discoveries with the public. They provide answers to our
questions about the past.
Knowing about those who lived before us is important
because the people of the past helped to make us who we are
today. The beginnings of our knowledge can be found in the
things people knew and did thousands of years ago. Our
languages and our ways of doing things—that is, our cultures—
have been passed down through the ages.
A culture is the
way of life shared
by a group of
people and
passed down from
one generation
to the next. The
people of a given
culture have the
same language
and similar
customs, beliefs,
ceremonies,
habits, food
preferences,
and so on.
We are only the most recent generations to inhabit
Earth. Human culture has been enriched by all of the
generations of people who lived, worked, and enjoyed
life before us. As we learn about these ancestors of
ours, we also learn about ourselves and how we got to
be the way we are. By studying the past, we can learn
much about the present.


10 ARCHAEOLOGY
Who Are Archaeologists?.
What Archaeologists Study
The word archaeology comes from the Greek word archaios,
meaning “ancient,” and the Latin logia, meaning “to talk
or write about”—that is, to study. Archaeologists study the
material remains of past cultures—the things people left
behind—to learn how people lived and how cultures have
changed through time.
Archaeology is a branch of a larger science called anthro-
pology—the study of human beings. While anthropologists are
concerned with all aspects of human makeup and behavior,
archaeologists focus on the things people left behind, such as
artifacts, that help tell the stories of the past.
Much of archaeology is the study of people who did not
leave a written history of their experience, or who left records
in languages that we no longer understand. Even so, these
people have left clues about themselves. Evidence of their
existence may take the form of artifacts such as stone or metal
tools, or pieces of broken pottery. Or we might find signs of
human activity called features, such as rocks arranged in
circles, or earth blackened by campfires from long ago, or
trenches that show where walls once stood.
Bits and pieces of the human past have survived through the
centuries. These prehistoric Caddoan artifacts provide information
about vanished peoples and cultures.


ARCHAEOLOGY 11
.Who Are Archaeologists?
Many archaeologists specialize in studying groups of people
who lived thousands of years ago. Some study the civilizations
that built the great pyramids in Egypt and the temples in Greece,
South America, and Asia. Some archaeologists are interested in
ancient hunters whose spear points pierced the sides of mam-
moths in the American Southwest. Others devote their careers
to studying the remains of early humans found in Africa.
Archaeologists also unravel puzzles about people who
lived much closer to our own time. We get clues from items
found in sunken ships, forgotten farmsteads, buried villages,
and traditional American Indian gathering places.
The Great Sphinx at Giza in Egypt, with a pyramid in
the background
The Great Hall at Grand Portage National Monument in Minnesota.
The original structure was built in 1784 and was later reconstructed
using information learned through archaeology.


12 ARCHAEOLOGY
Who Are Archaeologists?.
Who Were the First Americans?
Recent excavations in Chiquihuite cave in Mexico may provide
evidence that people lived in the Americas as early as 26,500
years ago, earlier than scientists once believed. Archaeologists
long thought the first human beings in the Americas were the
Clovis people who crossed a land bridge over the Bering Strait
into Alaska. Scientists believe these hunters of mammoths lived
at the end of the last Ice Age, about 12,000 or 13,000 years ago.
In the Page-Ladson site in the United States, however,
archaeologists have found human artifacts that are older than
the tools made and used by the Clovis people by about 1,000-
1,500 years. The finds and their early dates suggest humans
may have arrived in North America earlier than previously
believed and may have come from many directions.
Named for the amateur archaeologist who discovered it,
the Topper site in South Carolina is a prehistoric quarry that
was a source of chert, a flintlike rock used to make tools and
arrowheads. Work there is directed by Al Goodyear, an
archaeologist with the University of South Carolina. Excavation
began in the early 1980s. Much of the work is done by
volunteers, including teens, who come to the site each spring.
Goodyear says it is possible evidence will be found showing
that people were in the area of the Topper site long before the
last Ice Age. “We may be in for some surprises,” he says.
The discovery of artifacts and settlements abandoned relatively
recently—in historic times—helps tell us what happened to the
people who made or built them.
Archaeologists
study both historic
and prehistoric
cultures. What’s
the difference
between history
and prehistory?
Prehistory deals
with the time
before people
learned to write,
beginning when
humankind
appeared on this
planet and ending
when people
started to make
written records of
their activities.


ARCHAEOLOGY 13
.Who Are Archaeologists?
Instead of walking from Asia into Alaska, suggests one theory, prehistoric
immigrants might have sailed across oceans to reach the New World.
The first settlers on the eastern American coast might have been seafarers
from Europe, members of the ancient Solutrean culture of Spain and
France. During the height of the Ice Age, these sailors could have followed
an ice shelf that stretched from Ireland to Nova Scotia. As they crossed
the Atlantic Ocean, they would have hauled their boats up onto the ice
occasionally to rest, hunt and fish, or take shelter from storms.
Artifacts and Relationships
Archaeological artifacts are any items that have been made,
used, or changed by people. Examples include stone tools,
arrowheads, pottery, utensils, coins, bottles, and jewelry.
Artifacts typically are portable and easy to carry around.
The items were perhaps lost by their original owners. Many
have been broken and thrown away. Some might have been
hidden for safekeeping or placed alongside the bodies of their
owners in burial sites. To archaeologists, artifacts—and the
relationships between artifacts, features, and where the items
are found—are windows into the lives of the people who lived
at or used that place.


14 ARCHAEOLOGY
Who Are Archaeologists?.
This idea of relationships between objects is important.
Think of all the little parts that go together to make a
smartphone. If you take the individual parts out of a smartphone
and study each one separately, will that tell you how the phone
functions? No. You must look at all of the parts in place inside
the phone to see how they work together. The same is true of
archaeological sites. Like a smartphone, an archaeological site is
a complicated package that must be opened carefully and studied
as a whole if we are to make sense of it.
A researcher who looks at only a few stone tools and a
few kernels of corn might find that, by themselves, the artifacts
reveal little. However, if the tools are found in a room with
features such as a hearth or fire pit and artifacts such as a
grinding stone and other stone tools, as well as food storage
pits, the researcher might conclude that the place was a
prehistoric living area. A few kernels of corn found in a space
that did not have a hearth or any other artifacts would suggest
that the room was probably a storeroom.
Compared with an
isolated find,
artifacts found
together at a site
can provide more
information about
the people who
lived there and
everyday activities
of the past. We can
learn where people
lived, how they got
their food, and what
they wore.
Archaeological
findings may also
explain some of the
important events in
the lives of people
long dead—a war or
a ceremony, for
instance, or a major
fire or flood. Such
discoveries can help
us to understand
what shaped
entire civilizations.


ARCHAEOLOGY 15
.Who Are Archaeologists?
Scientists caution you not to be misled by the movies or
television shows you may have seen that show
prehistoric humans hurling spears at dinosaurs. They
believe that this could never have happened because
there were no people on Earth when dinosaurs lived.
Related Sciences
Several related sciences help to shine a light into the past.
Geologists study Earth itself and how it changes over time.
They examine the clues revealed by rocks, soil, and the shape
of the land. Geologists are interested in the forces that form the
physical features of the land and alter the land’s appearance.
Paleontologists examine fossils of dinosaurs and ancient
vegetation. They dig for fossils to learn about animal and plant
life of long ago, and they share their findings by writing reports
and creating museum exhibits.
Fossils are the stonelike remains of living things that
developed as minerals from the soil slowly replaced the
chemicals in the dead animals or plants.


16 ARCHAEOLOGY
Who Are Archaeologists?.
To help you keep these “ologies” straight, here’s a
simple list:
• Anthropology—the study of humans in the
widest sense
• Archaeology—the study of past human activities and
cultures based on the things people left behind
• Geology—the study of rocks, soil, and terrain
• Paleontology—the study of fossils of ancient animals
and plants
Archaeologists
may draw upon
the knowledge
and methods of
other specialties
and sciences,
too. Among these
are architecture,
astronomy, art,
biology, botany,
chemistry,
geography,
and physics.
Paleontologists study dinosaurs, such as this Deinonychus,
and other life forms from the distant past. This skeleton can
be seen at the Field Museum in Chicago.
The study of history also is often useful in archaeology.
One way to think of history is that it is the past revealed
through written records. Journals, newspapers, shopping lists,
legal papers, books, and letters are only a few of the sources
of information historians draw upon to re-create moments of
the past. Archaeologists may use written records to locate sites,
to find out how artifacts were made and used, and to expand
their understanding of earlier times. Even when they are inves-
tigating prehistoric sites, they may research the historic record
for clues to the more distant past.


ARCHAEOLOGY 17
.Who Are Archaeologists?
The Steamboat Bertrand:
Lost and Found
In 1865, a big steamboat called the Bertrand was
making its way up the Missouri River, carrying a full
cargo of supplies destined for miners and settlers
upriver in Montana. Just north of Omaha, Nebraska,
at a turn in the river called DeSoto Bend, the Bertrand
hit a submerged log and sank into the waters of the
Missouri. In the decades that followed, people forgot
about the steamboat, or they remembered it only in
stories passed down through the generations.
In 1968, treasure hunters called salvors studied
clues from old documents and discovered where the
Bertrand lay, well-protected. It took archaeologists
from the National Park Service months to uncover the
remains of the steamboat. Inside the hull, they found
clothing, tools, and thousands of other items. At the
DeSoto National Wildlife Refuge at Missouri Valley,
Iowa, you can see artifacts recovered from the Bertrand.
While the Bertrand never reached its destination,
it has served as a time capsule. This steamboat brought
cargo to people a century later and delivered not just
old-fashioned tools and clothing, but also a wealth of
knowledge about the past. Through archaeology, we
can understand much about how people of the time
worked, what they wore, what they ate, and what
goods they used.
Artifacts recovered from the
Bertrand are displayed at the
DeSoto National Wildlife Refuge
at Missouri Valley, Iowa.





ARCHAEOLOGY 19
.Archaeology and Responsibility
Archaeology and
Responsibility
Perhaps you have been at a ceremony where a time capsule
from a hundred years ago was opened. There might have been
coins inside, and newspapers, photographs, and other items
that people a century ago thought were important. You probably
thought the contents of the capsule looked odd and antiquated,
yet seeing the items helped you learn about the people who
had so carefully placed them in the capsule.
After the ceremony, what happened to those objects? If one
person took them home and kept them in a box, no one else
would be able to view them. Or, if everybody at the ceremony
took away one item, it soon would be hard to remember every-
thing that had once been together in the capsule. Some of the
items would probably be lost or given away or sold. As the time
capsule’s contents were scattered, its meaning would be lost.
But if the artifacts found in the capsule were properly
studied, labeled, and displayed in a public place, everyone
could enjoy them. People interested in the past could use the
items to learn what a place or a culture was like long ago.
Future generations could have the same pleasure in seeing
the items as you did when the time capsule was first opened.
The message from the people of the past would be kept alive,
passed down from generation to generation.
Digging up an archaeological site carries with it a duty
to carefully document everything that is disturbed.
The excavation process is destructive, and the paper
record is often all that remains. Without careful records,
precious and fragile pieces of the past may be lost forever.
An archaeological
site is like a time
capsule. Both
contain messages
from the past.


20 ARCHAEOLOGY
Archaeology and Responsibility.
An archaeological site, such as a shipwreck or the remains
of a prehistoric village, is like a time capsule. Each may contain
items that, when studied together, will reveal much information
about who was there and what their lives were like.
Being an archaeologist requires training to learn the correct
methods to find, excavate, document, and interpret sites and
the artifacts they contain. We rely on archaeologists to use the
right procedures so that they can gain as much information as
possible when they excavate a site or lead others in uncovering
artifacts. We rely on them to interpret messages from the past.
We also rely on them to share with all of us the information
that they discover.
“Collecting” and Vandalism
An archaeologist’s careful work can be ruined by a looter or
vandal who steals artifacts or damages a site. These thieves,
who call themselves “collectors,” only want to find items from
the past and take them. “Collectors” don’t care about the
knowledge that might be gained from studying how the
artifacts and features are related to other materials at the site.
These “collectors” may keep artifacts for themselves or sell
them. In either case, the artifacts disappear from public view,
the information that they might have provided is lost, and the
clues in the site’s soil and features are destroyed forever.
Archaeological
sites, like time
capsules, must
be opened in the
right way so that
the information
they contain will
not be lost. That is
a responsibility
for archaeologists,
who have studied
excavation
procedures and
preservation
techniques.
Looters, vandals, or “collectors” do serious and permanent
damage when they disturb archaeological sites and steal artifacts.
This historic cemetery at the Indiana Dunes National Lakeshore
was vandalized by “collectors.”


ARCHAEOLOGY 21
.Archaeology and Responsibility
Protecting the Past
There are many ways you can help to preserve archaeological
sites and artifacts and the knowledge that comes from them.
• Do not dig for artifacts unless you are working under the
direction of a trained archaeologist who has an approved
excavation permit.
• If you see others digging for artifacts, report what you
have witnessed to the agency that manages the land,
or tell the site manager, a park ranger, or other
responsible official.
• If you think you have discovered artifacts, leave them
alone. If you are in a national or state park or forest, report
the find to a ranger. Otherwise, contact your state historic
preservation officer. (See the resources section in this
pamphlet.) Experts can evaluate the artifacts where they
were found, then determine whether further study should
be done.
• Volunteer to help historical and archaeological societies
monitor sites against vandalism and repair any damage
that has been done.
• Learn all you can about the archaeology of your area so
that you can better inform others about the importance
of protecting sites and artifacts.
Pothunting is
stealing. Such
looting robs
present and future
generations of
knowledge that
can never
be replaced.
Pothunting is
against the law
on state, federal,
and American
Indian lands, and
in many privately
owned areas.


22 ARCHAEOLOGY
Archaeology and Responsibility.
Artifacts and the Internet:
The Illegal Market
The internet has made it easy to buy and sell artifacts.
This situation encourages pothunters (or
“collectors”) to destroy archaeological
sites all over the world in search of
artifacts to sell. The problem is growing at
an alarming rate despite laws that ban the
looting of sites and the transport and sale
of antiquities that have
been illegally obtained.
You can do your
part to discourage
the illegal trade in
artifacts. Never buy
artifacts that are
older than a few hundred years. The
chances are good that the object was dug
up illegally, is a fake, or was obtained by
destroying a site.
Protect yourself and protect the past:
If you or your parents or guardian buy
“old-timey” artwork, collectibles, or
crafts such as pottery, jewelry, or
carvings, buy pieces from modern
American Indians or other artists, or buy
reproductions (clearly labeled as such) of
ancient artifacts. Steer clear of purchasing
bottles, coins, belt buckles, and buttons
at antique shops, because many of these
items may have come from looted sites.


ARCHAEOLOGY 23
.Archaeology and Responsibility
Ozette: A Legend Comes True
Among the Makah Indians of northwestern Washington, the story is told
of a great disaster that destroyed the tribe’s ancestral home. The legend
says that, long ago, a mountain of mud fell upon their village at the edge
of the Pacific Ocean.
A new chapter was added to that story in 1970, when raging winter
storms sent high waves to scour the beach at a place called Ozette.
The waves washed away part of a mud bank and exposed many artifacts,
among them a canoe paddle, fishhooks of wood and bone, the shaft of
a harpoon, bits of inlaid boxes, and a woven hat.
Excavation of the site showed that the Makah legend is true: About
500 years ago, a mountainside of wet clay plunged down the steep, tree-
covered slope above the coastal village. The mudslide buried the sturdy
cedarwood houses without destroying them.
The wet clay sealed the houses so tightly that everything inside
was preserved except flesh, feathers, and skins. Looms, wood carvings,
wooden bowls, cone-shaped rain hats made of spruce roots, baskets,
and even cloth—materials that are rarely recovered from any archaeologi-
cal site—were held safe through the centuries.
The land is part of the Ozette Indian Reservation, home of the
Makah tribe. Archaeologists and members of the tribe worked together
to investigate the site. People from the reservation helped with the exca-
vation and with running a preservation laboratory at nearby Neah Bay.
Special techniques were needed to uncover and preserve the water-
logged wooden remains at Ozette. The excavators built a complicated
pumping system that sprayed jets of water of different strengths—from
blasts powerful enough to remove dense mud from house planks,
to a gentle trickle used for washing the muck from combs and
wooden spindles.
By agreement, all excavated objects have remained on the reserva-
tion in a museum built and operated by the Makah tribe. “We look in a
special way at what has come from the mud at Ozette,” say the Makah,
“for this is our heritage.”


The Development of Archaeology.
The Development
of Archaeology
Archaeology as it is practiced today is a fairly new science.
Several hundred years ago, people who dug into ancient sites
often did so only to find treasures that could be collected or
sold. While many of the collectors called themselves antiquarians,
by today’s standards they were little more than pothunters.
Thieves did enormous damage. In Egypt, for example,
thieves broke into most of the pyramids and tombs and took
what they found, without leaving any record of what had
been there. They were not interested in learning about those
who had left the artifacts or covered the
walls with symbols. Over the years,
fortunately, many people came to
realize that the information that
could be gained from a site was
often more valuable than the
artifacts themselves.
Taken from Egypt in 1799, the
Rosetta Stone was the key to
deciphering Egyptian hieroglyphs.
The stone had three inscriptions
on it—the same text written in
three scripts, including Greek and
ancient Egyptian hieroglyphic
writing. A French scholar used the
Greek text, which he could read,
as a guide to translate the
mysterious hieroglyphs. It was
the breakthrough scientists
needed to understand the
pictorial writing system of
ancient Egypt.


ARCHAEOLOGY 25
.The Development of Archaeology
American Archaeology
In the United States, Congress has passed laws that recognize
the importance of our past and the need to protect archaeological
sites. The first major piece of federal legislation for preservation
was an act of Congress in 1889 that authorized the president to
protect Pueblo Indian ruins at Casa Grande, Arizona. Among
the important laws since that time are the following.
Antiquities Act of 1906. This law protected cultural materials
found on public lands and was intended to stop the destruction
of prehistoric sites and artifacts in the West. It also set up a way
for responsible archaeologists to excavate important sites.
Historic Sites Act of 1935. This act authorized several
programs to be carried out under the National Park Service.
Under this law, sites that have exceptional value for commemo-
rating or illustrating U.S. history can be protected as national
historic landmarks.
Reservoir Salvage Act of 1960. When federal hydroelectric
projects began to destroy large numbers of archaeological sites
in the 1950s, Congress passed this law to require archaeological
investigations before the construction of dams and reservoirs.
National Historic Preservation Act of 1966. At the time of
this law’s passage, more archaeological sites and historic build-
ings were being destroyed by rapid economic development than
by pothunting or vandalism. This landmark piece of legislation
extended the protection of the federal government to historic
resources at the state and local levels. The act has provided for
federal grants to state and territorial historic-preservation agen-
cies, and its passage led to the establishment of the National
Register of Historic Places. The National Register includes not
only national historic landmarks, but also sites, objects, build-
ings, and districts (collections of structures) that are significant
in American history, architecture, archaeology, and culture.
Department of Transportation Act of 1966. This act, passed
in the same year as the NHPA, placed additional requirements
on transportation projects. Under Section 4(f) of this act, a
transportation project cannot begin until the federal government
has shown there are no feasible alternatives to the project.
Also, the government’s project plans must have the least
amount of impact possible on any public resources in the area,
including historic sites. Numerous archaeological sites have
been identified and studied as a result of this act.


26 ARCHAEOLOGY
The Development of Archaeology.
Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979. This
law gives more protection to archaeological resources on
public and American Indian lands and encourages the sharing
of information gathered from these sites. It also toughens
penalties for the unauthorized excavation of or damage to
archaeological sites and controls the sale of artifacts. Since
1979, all construction on federal lands and all construction that
uses federal funds require an archaeological survey. The survey
determines whether archaeological sites will be damaged by
the construction and how the information from the sites can be
recorded before that happens. All states have similar laws that
protect archaeological resources on state lands.
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act of
1990. Archaeologists exploring the past sometimes come upon
the bones and other remains of human beings. Native
Americans have raised concerns that the burial grounds of their
tribes should not be disturbed, any more than the cemeteries of
other groups. Many American Indians believe that the remains
of their ancestors should not be stored or displayed in muse-
ums, but should be reburied according to the traditions and
religious beliefs of their tribes.
The act protects American Indian grave sites on lands man-
aged by the federal government. The law requires thousands of
federally funded museums and agencies to inventory their hold-
ings of human remains, grave goods, sacred objects, and other
items important to American Indian cultures. The museums and
agencies must tell the tribes about the sacred and cultural items
in their collections and return the objects to the tribes that
claim them.
1954 Hague Convention for the Protection of Cultural
Property in the Event of Armed Conflict. This convention,
eventually ratified by the United States, was established with the
aim of preventing acts of looting and destruction such as those
that occurred in Europe during World War II. States that have rat-
ified the convention are required to identify and protect cultural
properties such as archaeological sites, monuments, art works,
and important collections. In addition, the protections were
expanded by the International Committee of the Blue Shield in
1996 to include cultural properties threatened by all man-made
or natural disasters. The United Nations Educational, Scientific
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) advocates the use of the
Blue Shield symbol to mark cultural properties as protected loca-
tions. This symbol is not currently used in the United States.


ARCHAEOLOGY 27
.The Development of Archaeology
Kennewick Man—A Survivor
On the Columbia River in southeastern Washington, two young boat-
racing spectators stumbled across one of the oldest skeletons ever
discovered in North America. The skeleton was named Kennewick Man
for the town where the bones were found in July 1996. Scientists using
radiocarbon dating estimate the skeleton is about 9,300 years old.
Kennewick Man was a survivor. His bones show he had suffered a
broken elbow, a crushed chest, and a skull fracture as though he were
clubbed in the head. He lived through all these injuries. He also carried
a spear point permanently stuck in his right hip. The stabbing wound,
like his other injuries, had healed. But the Stone Age weapon lodged in
his hip probably made walking difficult for Kennewick Man, who was
about 45 or 50 years old when he died.
Soon after his skeleton was found, several American Indian tribes
in the Pacific Northwest claimed it under the Native American Graves
Protection and Repatriation Act. The tribes considered Kennewick Man
(whom they referred to as “Ancient One”) an honored ancestor and
wished to rebury his bones secretly so the skeleton could never again be
unearthed. Tribal beliefs teach that the remains of ancestors should not be
disturbed, but if bones are disturbed they should quickly be set at peace.
Eight well-known archaeologists and anthropologists sued for the
right to study the bones. The ancient remains could help solve the
mystery of who the first Americans were, where they came from, and
how and when they got here. Only a few skeletons that scientists believe
are more than 8,000 years old have ever been found in North America,
and the Kennewick skeleton was in excellent condition and
nearly complete.
A federal court ruled in July 2004 in favor of the scientists. The court
found the Indian tribes had not shown they were Kennewick Man’s living
descendants. Earlier tests suggested the man was not closely related to
any early Native Americans, but was closer to the Ainu, the indigenous
(native) people of Japan.
In 2015, DNA tests showed that Kennewick Man was more closely
related to modern Native Americans. By an act of Congress, the remains
of Kennewick Man were returned in 2017 to a coalition of Columbia Basin
tribes for reburial according to their traditions.


28 ARCHAEOLOGY
The Development of Archaeology.
Appreciating the Past
As you can see, archaeology has become an important
science for exploring our past and preserving our heritage.
Visitor centers have been built at many archaeological sites
where you can view artifacts and learn about the people who
made and used them. Museums, schools, and public
buildings may also have exhibits that share with everyone
the knowledge gained by studying the past.
Programs at many colleges and universities invite young
people to learn the methods of archaeology, then to help
excavate sites and prepare artifacts for display, analyze
artifacts, and publish results. Archaeology clubs and
professional associations promote the appreciation of the past
and help protect cultural resources.
Libraries are a rich source of information about
archaeology and ancient cultures. Librarians can help you find
books about the science of archaeology and about the peoples
and periods of the past that interest you.
The internet also offers many opportunities for exploring the
world of archaeology via computer. Many archaeological sites and
visitor centers have websites, as do university programs, federal
agencies, and archaeological organizations. For some suggested
books and sites, see the resources section of this pamphlet.
Before you
go online, be
sure you have
your parent
or guardian’s
permission.


ARCHAEOLOGY 29
.The Development of Archaeology
This polished black ceramic
vessel was recovered from a
prehistoric Caddoan village
in Texas. It is decorated with
engraved lines that are filled
with red pigment.
Modern-Day Middens
People today throw out trash, just
as people did thousands of years
ago. Archaeologists who call themselves
“garbologists” use archaeological
techniques to study modern landfills
and trash heaps. They look at what we
toss out. From such studies, they can
learn what products people use, what
they eat, how much they recycle, and
what they value.
List the items that you and your
family throw away during a week. Then
imagine that archaeologists a thousand
years in the future find that trash. What
will they be able to learn about your
family? What will your trash say about
the culture in which you live?


30 ARCHAEOLOGY
The Development of Archaeology.
The Iceman: Visitor From the Past
In September 1991, hikers in the Alps along the border
of Italy and Austria found a body frozen in a glacier at
an altitude of 10,500 feet. The corpse was so well-
preserved that the hikers thought it was a fellow
mountaineer who had died on the slopes recently.
Medical examiners soon realized, however, that the
Iceman, as he has come to be known, was not a recent
accident victim. The mummified body had been locked
in the glacier for some 5,300 years, making it the most
ancient human body ever found virtually intact. With
him, he brought his clothes, tools, and weapons.
Scientists examining the body and the artifacts
found with it discovered that the man was well-
equipped for alpine travel. He carried a backpack, a knife
with a flint blade, an unfinished bow, a leather quiver
with more than a dozen arrows, a copper ax, and several
small tools of flint and bone. He stood about 5 feet
3 inches tall. He was perhaps 40 years old, with dark
hair and a beard. He wore leather shoes lined with grass
for warmth. The man’s leather jacket was finely stitched
with threads of animal sinew or plant fiber.
Scientists at first thought the Iceman had died in an
accident. But more thorough investigation revealed that
an arrowhead had severed an artery. Scientists believe
he was a victim of homicidal violence.


ARCHAEOLOGY 31
.The Development of Archaeology
Three-dimensional computer images, or CAT scans,
have been made of the skeleton and internal organs.
Tests for carbon 14 have been done on the grass lining
of one shoe and on the body itself. The dates of the
grass lining and the body help scientists relatively date
the other artifacts.
See the section on radiocarbon dating later in this
pamphlet. The Iceman’s body will be left as intact as
possible for future investigators to examine with even
more sophisticated techniques.





ARCHAEOLOGY 33
.How Archaeology Happens
How Archaeology
Happens
Archaeologists follow a careful step-by-step process designed
to protect resources and obtain the most information possible.
The process includes these steps: site location, development of
background research and a research design, site survey and
fieldwork, artifact identification and examination, interpreta-
tion, preservation, and information sharing.
Site Location
Archaeologists find sites in many ways.
They sometimes study old letters,
maps, journals, and other documents
for clues to the locations of historic set-
tlements or American Indian camps.
They may use aerial photographs and
pictures taken from satellites to home
in on the places they are trying to find.
They talk to people living in the area,
who often have the deepest knowledge.
Sites are sometimes found during surveys that may be
required before new roads, dams, apartment houses,
or other structures can be built. Archaeologists walk the entire
area, looking for anything made by humans that is more than
50 years old. They may dig test pits or trenches in the pathway
of the proposed construction.
If artifacts appear, the site may be excavated before
construction machinery disturbs the area.
Luck sometimes plays a role in the discovery of archaeo-
logical sites. Scouts on a hike might notice an arrowhead on the
ground, or a piece of pottery. They don’t move the artifact, but
report the location to archaeologists who can examine the item
where it lies and determine whether it signals the presence of a
site worth studying.
Measuring an obsidian artifact from the
Nightfire Island site in Oregon


34 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
When archaeologists survey an area to find sites, they will
usually examine rodent burrows. Burrowing rodents sometimes
uncover artifacts. Such finds in or near burrows might be a clue
that other items lie buried in earth below. Newly plowed farm
fields may also turn up buried artifacts.
When they have discovered a site, archaeologists thoroughly
examine the area before disturbing it. They walk all over the site
and look for artifacts and surface features to help them
understand what might be found there, as well as how old the
site or objects might be. They may dig test pits to get an idea of
what is below the surface of the ground. They may use
magnetometry, which measures changes in the magnetic field
that can show features such as hearths, where the ground was
once heated by fire. Archaeologists sometimes use ground-
penetrating radar and metal detectors to locate buried artifacts,
houses, or pits.
Information from the initial survey must be written down
so that the site can be found again. Archaeologists often
illustrate a site report with photographs, maps, and videos that
help explain how a site was found and what it looked like
before any excavation was done.
An Awesome Find
In 1974 in China, a farmer digging a well broke through the roof of
the tomb of an emperor who had lived more than 2,000 years ago.
Archaeologists who excavated the tomb found an army of terra-cotta
statues—more than 6,000 life-size soldiers, who were crafted after real-life
people (no two statures are alike), with their horses and chariots, standing
in rows to guard the dead emperor.


ARCHAEOLOGY 35
.How Archaeology Happens
Images scratched
into rock
surfaces are
called petroglyphs.
Painted images
are called
pictographs.
Alone or Together?
A discovery might turn out to be an isolated find—
simply an artifact or two left in a place
where people did not spend much time.
Perhaps an ancient hunter lost a
spear far from camp. Maybe
travelers along an old road
threw away the container that
held their lunch.
The information that can
be gained from an isolated
find is usually limited to
the artifact itself, with
little to be learned from
the artifact’s surroundings.
In 1940 in Lascaux, France, some boys playing in the woods found
a hole in the ground. They widened it with their pocketknives and
discovered the entrance to a cave. On the cave’s white walls were
pictographs—pictures of humans and animals painted in black,
yellow, and red by people who had been there thousands of
years earlier.
An isolated artifact such as a
hunter’s lost spear point usually
provides few details about the
culture that produced the object.


36 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Of greater value are sites—locations with a number of
objects in the same place, perhaps the remains of fires or
houses. A site might be a prehistoric camping area, a village,
or a place for storing food. It might be a community that we
know about from history, such as an early pioneer settlement or
a fort. The artifacts found could be tools, weapons, household
goods, pottery, remains of clothing, or trash.
Why Shouldn’t You Take That Arrowhead?
You are on a Scout hike and you spot an arrowhead. Naturally, you’re
excited. You want to pick it up to look at it more closely. You want to put
that artifact in your pocket
and take it home with you
as a souvenir.
You found it, but is it
yours to take? Before you
slip that arrowhead into
a pocket, think of all the
information that is lost when an artifact is pocketed and removed from
the place where it was found. Picking up arrowheads—or bits of pottery
or any other artifact—is not as harmless as it might seem.
• A projectile point (as archaeologists call arrowheads and spear points)
found on the surface of the ground might be evidence that an undis-
covered wealth of archaeological information lies waiting at that place.
• By its shape and size, the point could help archaeologists identify which
culture left it.
• If the point is made of a material not found locally, it might give clues
about trade practices or distances traveled to quarries.
• The arrowhead might be the key to dating the entire site.
When you take an artifact, you take away a unique clue that the
archaeologist might need to determine a site’s age, who lived there,
or how they lived.


ARCHAEOLOGY 37
.How Archaeology Happens
Research Design
Like most sciences, archaeology requires the use of the scien-
tific method to extract as much data as efficiently as possible.
How can archaeologists find answers to the past if they don’t
know what questions to ask? To do this, they develop research
questions about the site they will investigate.
Some examples are: How did the development of the
oxbow lake affect American Indian hunting and transportation
over time? Were women and children working at the textile mills
during the Industrial Revolution healthier than those on farms?
Did allied French and American soldiers suffer the same hard-
ships in camp before a 1779 battle in the American Revolution?
Research questions enable archaeologists to determine
what areas of the site to study, decide what artifacts can
provide crucial answers, and select what research to conduct.
The research design also enables archaeologists to make a
hypothesis that can be tested, such as: American troops were
better supplied than French troops. Archaeologists can test this
hypothesis by excavating the French and American camps. If
the American camps contain more animal bones, more
nutritious cuts of meat, more dishes, and weapons in good
condition, then there was evidence to support the hypothesis.
Background Research
Prior to any excavation, archaeologists
conduct historical research about the
site. Some of this research includes
examining old and new maps and aerial
photographs to see how landforms have
changed over time. A river might form
an oxbow lake, or a mountain may have
been mined flat, for example.
Archaeologists look at old files and
manuscripts to determine if parts of the
site were excavated in the past. They
may also study old deeds, newspapers,
diaries, letters, photographs, and other
documents that have information about
the people who used the site and how
they used it.


38 ARCHAEOLOGY
Site Excavation
Although digging is only a part of the scientific process of
studying and understanding a site, the work of uncovering
artifacts is what many people think of when they think about
archaeology. There is an excitement to clearing away centuries
of dust or muck and finding artifacts that haven’t been seen by
humans in hundreds or thousands of years.
But along with that excitement comes a great responsibility
to plan and carry out a proper excavation and to preserve every
bit of information that can be gathered. Archaeologists work
slowly and record everything they observe about the artifacts
and the surroundings in which these items are found. If possi-
ble, they may leave a portion of the site untouched for future
archaeologists to explore with new and better techniques.
The reason for taking such pains is that much of the
information a site holds comes not only from the artifacts
themselves, but also from how the items are found. Much can
be learned from the positions of the items, how close together
they are, and in what layers of earth.
Teams can use a process called site stabilization to develop
a plan for protecting a site that is at risk, such as one located in
an area of erosion. The methods for stabilizing will vary and
may be short-term or long-term, depending on the particular
issues and conditions at the site. The process should be careful-
ly supervised and will often require calling in engineers or other
experts to develop the stabilization plan. Stabilization will
sometimes be as simple as building sandbag berms to prevent
flooding; sometimes it will be a more elaborate process.
How Archaeology Happens
Plant remains were uncovered at this 3,800-year-old site along the Iowa River
in Coralville, Iowa.


ARCHAEOLOGY 39
.How Archaeology Happens
Archaeologists are especially interested in trash heaps
where people threw out what they no longer needed or
wanted. Called middens, the piles of trash or garbage
often reveal much about the people who made them.
There may be shell, bone, and plant remains that
show what people ate. Broken plates, bowls, and other
ordinary items in middens give an idea of what things
people used in their everyday lives.
For example, Confederate soldiers killed in March 1862
at Glorieta Pass in New Mexico were buried one over another.
Archaeologists excavating the site have taken care to reveal
the burials layer by layer so that they can know which artifacts
go with which skeleton. In this way, investigators can use the
artifacts to identify the soldiers and to learn what job each
one did in the army.
Keeping accurate records during excavation helps archaeologists learn about the site
even after the dig has concluded.


40 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Once it has been moved from the spot where it was found,
an artifact can never be returned to exactly the same place.
Excavation destroys a site, so data must be recorded before an
artifact and its surroundings are disturbed. The records that
archaeologists make include site maps, photographs of features
like houses and pits, and drawings of artifacts.
When accurate records are kept, archaeologists will be able
to study a site even if they were not present during the excava-
tion. Ideally, archaeologists study and write up their findings
soon after a site has been excavated. Researchers of the future,
however, might want to use new tools and new methods to
reexamine the data from an excavation. Accurate records are
essential for those future archaeologists who will rely on data
gathered today, or even five decades ago, for research that
might not be done until many years from now.
The excavation tools used by archaeologists include shov-
els, buckets, wheelbarrows, trowels, whisk brooms, brushes,
and wire screens. Surveyors’ instruments are used at large sites
that have many excavation areas. At some sites, excavation is
done with water sprayed through hoses. Other sites lie beneath
rivers, sinkholes, lakes, and oceans, and require scuba diving
and specialized underwater tools. Other tools that are just as
important are graph paper, notebooks, pencils, cameras, and
measuring equipment to record findings as they are being made.
An archaeologist’s excavation tools include trowels, whisk brooms,
brushes, shovels, buckets, wheelbarrows, and wire screens.


ARCHAEOLOGY 41
.How Archaeology Happens
Techniques of Excavation
Archaeologists begin working at a site by establishing a grid
over the area with lengths of string tied to wooden stakes.
They may use a compass or a surveyor’s transit to establish
straight lines, and a tape measure to space the lines evenly.
An excavation will have a primary datum point that is
used as a reference point for laying out the squares of the grid.
Ideally, the primary datum point is marked permanently so that
archaeologists of the future can measure from it and establish
exactly where the earlier excavation took place. The marker
might be a cement post or a steel pipe, or the datum point
might be located on a permanent natural feature such as a
rock outcropping.
When it is complete, the grid will look like a big checker-
board. Each square is usually one or two meters (about 3 to
6 1 ⁄2 feet) on a side. Each
square is given a grid number.
Anything found within a
certain grid square will be
given the number of that
square. That way, archaeolo-
gists can record the exact
spot in a site where each
artifact is discovered.
Excavators also determine
a datum point on the surface
of the ground to use in mak-
ing vertical measurements.
Usually, the elevation for each
corner of the grid is known.
Archaeologists can use the
datum point or elevation
to measure how deeply in the
earth each artifact is buried.
An artifact’s vertical depth
is known as its depth
below datum.
A grid system helps
archaeologists record
the exact location where
each artifact is found.


42 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Working their way down into the earth, archaeologists
slowly uncover a site. When they find artifacts, they use small
brushes to clear away the dirt. Then they record the grid num-
ber and the depth at which an item was found, and any other
information about the artifact’s position, appearance, and how
close it is to other artifacts.
If excavators find a cluster of artifacts, a feature such as a
hearth or a campfire, or a piece of a structure such as a wall,
post, pit, or floor, they will document what they find even more
carefully. They will make photographs and drawings to show
how all of the materials relate to one another.
With proper and accurate records and measurements, it is
possible to re-create a site on paper. It’s also possible to use a
computer to develop a three-dimensional figure that shows the
relationships between artifacts (objects that can be collected and
taken from the field) and features (unmovable elements of a site
such as fire pits, houses, storage areas, and burial chambers).
Provenience is a word archaeologists use to describe the
exact place in a site where an artifact is found. Each
artifact’s location can be described horizontally by its
grid number and vertically by its depth below datum.
This archaeologist and Scout gauge depth by taking a vertical
measurement within the grid system.


ARCHAEOLOGY 43
.How Archaeology Happens
After all information is recorded, each artifact can be
placed in a plastic or paper bag. The bag is carefully labeled
with information about the object—the site number, grid number,
depth below datum, date of the excavation, and names of the
archaeologists. This process preserves information about what
was found together.
Soil is sifted through a wire screen. Sifting may reveal
small artifacts, bones, charcoal, tiny flakes or chips of stone
(the leftovers of stone tool making), and other fragments that
might otherwise be overlooked by excavators. A sample of soil
may be washed in a process known as flotation to separate
out any seeds or plant remains (clues to what plants people
were eating).
Keeping Things in Context
When archaeologists excavate a site, they search for clues that
can help them piece together the lives of the people who used
that bit of ground. They attempt to establish the context of the
site—where artifacts were found, how the items relate to one
another, and what the site as a whole reveals about the people
who were once there.
After all information is recorded about the exact spot where an
artifact was found and the context in which it was found, the
item can be removed from the earth, bagged, and labeled.
Plant remains tell
not only what was
eaten, but also
what was burned.


44 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
For example, an excavator who finds a clay bowl in the
living area of an ancient house might conclude that the bowl
was a simple household object. If the bowl were found in the
tomb of a king or on the altar of a ruined temple, however, the
excavator may determine that the bowl might have had sacred
or ritual meaning.
By carefully recording the context of a site, archaeologists
can gain information that helps to tell the full story of the people
who lived there. Researchers consider lots of evidence as they
establish a site’s context. Among the important factors are the
formation processes that shaped the site.
Sites are created by the activities of everyday living and by
the reuse of a location over time. Trash is tossed in the same
place day after day, creating a midden. Rooms are lived in,
eventually abandoned, and possibly reoccupied by later arrivals
to the area. If a room is reoccupied, the new owners may clear
away debris and discard artifacts some other place.
In most cases, formation processes are gradual. New
buildings are erected on the ruins of old structures. Dust carried
by the wind slowly covers the remains of an abandoned
homestead on the prairie. As the years pass, such factors as
erosion and changes in climate can affect the appearance of an
area and the locations of artifacts within a site. By paying
attention to the formation processes that have been at work,
archaeologists can better understand the context of a site.
Soil from a site is sifted through a screen to reveal small artifacts.
Though quite rare,
catastrophic
events such as
fires, floods,
avalanches, and
volcanic eruptions
may drastically
reshape an area.


ARCHAEOLOGY 45
.How Archaeology Happens
Change may come gradually, as wind and erosion slowly reshape a site. Time has
taken a toll on this abandoned rock house near Littlefield, Arizona.
Catastrophic formation processes sometimes happen suddenly. In the
year a.d. 79, the volcano Mount Vesuvius erupted above the ancient
towns of Pompeii and Herculaneum in Italy. Hot volcanic ash buried
the cities, killing most of the people and then hardening around their
bodies. The sites were discovered in 1711. Excavations of the cities
continue even
today, yielding
a clear picture of
life in Pompeii and
Herculaneum at
the moment the
volcano erupted.
Archaeologists
have found Pompeii
well-preserved
under the blanket
of volcanic ash.


46 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Reading the Evidence
Two important principles in archaeology are association
and superposition.
The principle of association says that artifacts found
together were probably used together and are probably about
the same age. An archaeologist who discovers a stone tool next
to a piece of pottery in a storage pit feature can make a good
guess that the tool and the pottery are about the same age,
were probably used at about the same time, and may have
been used by the same person. The principle of association
would lose its value if somebody were to dig up the tool,
thereby rearranging the distinctive soil filling the storage pit
and covering the artifacts. If that happened, an archaeologist
might never know that the pot and the tool were closely related.
The principle of superposition says that the deeper an
artifact is buried, the older it is. Over the years, layers of earth,
debris, trash, and other materials
build up in a site. Stratigraphy is
the order in which layers have
formed in a site. The oldest
artifacts will be in the bottom
layers, while artifacts in the
layers above will be younger.
However, artifacts can move
within layers. Objects are some-
times displaced by burrowing
rodents. Objects may move due to
movements of the soil itself, such
as frost heaving—water in the soil
freezes and pushes earth upward.
Artifacts may also be moved by
later generations of people. Perhaps
an Apache picked up an old spear
point to put in a medicine pouch,
or a miner used a prehistoric grind-
ing stone to build the foundation of
a cabin. Of course, if a pothunter
digs into a site and makes no
record of which artifacts were in
which layers, vital information
about the age of the items will
be destroyed.
Distinct layers are visible at the prehistoric
Devil’s Mouth site at Amistad Reservoir
along the Rio Grande. Deeper layers of a
site generally hold older artifacts.


ARCHAEOLOGY 47
.How Archaeology Happens
To Dig or Not to Dig
Archaeologists do not excavate every site they locate. Sometimes
they must decide which sites are most likely to answer their questions
about a particular problem, and then excavate only those sites.
Perhaps there are historical records for some early settlement,
like Jamestown, Virginia, but the accounts are vague or incomplete.
Archaeologists may decide to excavate a site to get answers to
specific questions that the written record doesn’t cover.
Or maybe there are sites facing certain destruction that require
careful but quick excavation. In a situation, for example, where 50 sites
will be damaged by a highway construction project, archaeologists
might investigate only a representative sample of those sites, and
then actually excavate only a few. This is done to keep from getting
a lot of the same information and to reduce the overall costs of
the project.
Archaeologists also know that some finds are better left
undisturbed. Museums don’t always preserve archaeological finds
as well as the items would have been preserved if they had simply
been left in the ground. It’s also likely that methods and techniques
not yet developed will prove to be better than those now used.
For all of these reasons,
archaeologists may decide not
to excavate a known site. In any
case, they have a responsibility
to justify a dig—to explain why
they are excavating particular
sites and what they expect to
learn from their investigations.
Archaeologists must have
specific research questions
in mind before they dig, and
the excavation must be guided
by a well-thought-out plan
of research.


48 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Artifact Identification and Examination
The time archaeologists spend in the field finding and
excavating sites is short compared with the time they must
spend in the laboratory analyzing artifacts and writing about
their findings. Much of the work of archaeology, and much of
the excitement of discovery, happens in the laboratory.
When artifacts arrive at an archaeological lab, they are
cleaned and labeled. A code number may be written directly
on each item or on a tag attached to it. Code numbers allow
researchers to connect the artifact to the records made during
the excavation and to compare artifacts from different layers
or locations without the risk of mixing them up.
In the laboratory, archaeologists examine each artifact and
try to figure out what it is, what it is made of, how old it is,
and what it was used for, among
other things. New finds are compared
with already identified materials. A
site may yield hundreds or thousands
of artifacts—far too many for each
item to be compared individually with
every other item found. Therefore,
archaeologists classify or categorize
artifacts, grouping items into similar
categories. They might group together
stone flakes from a site, or charcoal,
pottery shards, or spear points.
Then they can compare the cate-
gories with other artifact collections to
see if the items found in a certain site
are similar to or different from those
found elsewhere. Comparisons can
help archaeologists make educated
interpretations about whether the
people who left one set of artifacts
were also active in other locations,
or whether different groups were
doing the same kinds of activities.Archaeologists spend much of their
time in laboratories, examining and
categorizing artifacts. After artifacts
have been sorted and analyzed, they
are carefully stored.


ARCHAEOLOGY 49
.How Archaeology Happens
Artifacts that are similar in material and appearance might
be hard to tell apart at first glance. So archaeologists look
for identifying clues. For example, modern investigators have
learned a great deal about how early Americans made arrow-
heads and spear points (or projectile points, as scientists call
them). When a point is found, archaeologists can compare it
with their artifact records. The shape and size of a projectile
point and the stone from which it was formed (commonly
flint, obsidian, chert, or quartzite) may reveal who made it
and when.
Investigators also learn much from pottery. Through the
ages, people have used pots for cooking and for storing food,
water, grain, and other items. When the pots broke, their own-
ers often threw them out with the garbage. Although a pot
might be fragile and easily broken, the fired clay used to make
pottery can survive hundreds and even thousands of years,
especially if it is buried in a trash pit or midden where it is
protected from the weather.
Other clues to the origin of a
projectile point may lie in the
way it was made, a process
called flint knapping. Typically,
arrowhead makers hammered
a chunk of flint with a stone tool
to remove most of the unwanted
material and roughly shape the
point. For detail work, such as
thinning, fine shaping, and
finishing a point’s sharp edge,
they pressed a piece of bone or
antler against the flint to break
off small flakes. Flint-knapping
methods leave distinctive
marks on projectile points. To
an archaeologist, these marks
are almost like fingerprints in
identifying the method used.
The material and the process used
to make a projectile point, as well as
the point’s size and shape, are clues
to the culture that produced it.


50 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Perishable artifacts may crumble and turn to dust at the slightest touch,
or disintegrate when exposed to air. Some objects are so fragile that
efforts must be made to preserve them in the field, before investigators
can begin to examine them in the laboratory. Preservation techniques
will be covered in more detail later in this section.
Different groups of people made pots in distinctive ways.
Archaeologists often can recognize the special shapes and
markings that various groups have used on pottery. Geologists
can help identify where the clay used in a pot was originally
found. Sometimes the pieces of a broken pot can be put back
together. If not, archaeologists may be able to measure several
pieces and use the measurements to determine the original size
of the pot. Knowing the size can help them understand how
and when the pot was used, and by what group.
Less common than stone tools or clay pots are perishable
artifacts made of wood, plant fibers, animal sinew, and other
organic materials (materials that were once living). These objects
excite particular interest because they are so rare. Dry caves
occasionally yield well-preserved baskets, bits of cloth, and
wood carvings. Sealed tombs may contain wooden furniture
and linen fabrics. Leather clothing, natural-fiber ropes, and even
entire human bodies may be preserved through a natural tan-
ning process in peat bogs. In some cases, artifacts may be cov-
ered with a protective layer of mud or frozen in glacial ice.
The different shapes and markings of clay pottery can reveal much about the people
who made the pots. These two ceramic vessels were recovered from a prehistoric
Caddoan village in Cass County, Texas.


ARCHAEOLOGY 51
.How Archaeology Happens
Pollen Analysis
It might surprise you to learn that something as ordinary as the
pollen from flowers, trees, and grasses can be useful to archae-
ologists. Pollen from different types of plants looks different and
can be identified when viewed under a microscope. Carried by
the wind and by insects, great amounts of pollen may settle in
an area, then be covered by dust or other formation processes.
Archaeologists may use pollen to identify what people ate
and what they grew in their fields. The presence of corn pollen
in a site, for instance, indicates that the people grew corn for
food. The presence of pollen in a burial site may suggest that
the people placed
flowers on the
graves of their dead.
Pollen analysis of a
Stone Age grave site
in Iraq showed that
the dead man’s
body had been
covered with eight
different types of
flowers, including
hollyhocks.
From pollen grains,
researchers can tell
what plants grew in
an area, what plants
people used as food,
or what kinds of
flowers they put on
the graves of their
deceased. Note the
various shapes and
surface textures of
these pollen grains.


52 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Dating Artifacts
Archaeologists have several ways to figure out how old artifacts,
structures, and sites are. If they know the date of one site, they
can assume that another site with the same kinds of artifacts is
about the same age. For instance, if they know that a certain
kind of pottery found in site A was made 500 years ago, archae-
ologists can be fairly certain that pieces of the same pottery
found in site B were made at the same time.
Stratigraphy (the order of layers in a site) provides another
dating method. Artifacts buried in deeper levels of a site are
usually older than items above them. If archaeologists know
the age of one level, they can determine that artifacts beneath
that level were probably left at an earlier date.
These ways of estimating the ages of artifacts are called
relative dating techniques because the date of one artifact or
site is related to the date of another artifact or site. Powerful
scientific tools exist for more accurate, absolute dating—that
is, for assigning an estimated age to an artifact or a site based
on laboratory analysis, chemical testing, or other more inten-
sive techniques. Among the most used dating techniques are
the following.
Radiocarbon Dating. All living things have carbon in them.
After a plant or animal dies, its carbon 14 (a type of carbon)
slowly decays into carbon 12. Scientists calculate that,


ARCHAEOLOGY 53
.How Archaeology Happens
after 5,730 years, half of the carbon 14 still remains;
after 11,460 years, only one-fourth is left.
In 1949, scientists discovered a way to use the rate of
carbon 14 decay to estimate the age of artifacts that contain
carbon. Today, radiocarbon dating is one of the most popular
methods of absolute dating for wood, ashes, bones, plant
remains, and other items that were once living.
Dendrochronology. Look at a log that has been sawn in
half and you will see rings, one for every year the
tree was alive. In years with good growing condi-
tions, the rings were wide. If there was a
drought, the rings were narrower. A fire might
have left a scar on one or more rings.
Dendro means “tree” and chronology
means “time.” Scientists can analyze the
growth rings of trees in an area and use
the rings to make a chart of time. They
can then look at logs used long ago as
firewood or as beams to hold up the
roof of a house. By matching the rings
on the logs or wooden beams with the
growth rings of trees whose ages are
known, it is possible to tell when the
wood of the logs or beams grew. That
gives the age of when the tree was cut
down, but it doesn’t tell us how long that
cut log was in place.
Studies of growth rings in bald cypress
trees in Virginia suggest that severe droughts
may have devastated the Roanoke colony of the
1580s and the Jamestown settlement of the early
1600s. The studies, published in 1998, show that the first
years at Jamestown—dubbed “The Starving Time”—
were the driest years in many centuries. The droughts
caused deadly hardships including famine for both
groups of English colonists, and may have helped to
wipe out Roanoke. The 120 people of the Lost Colony
disappeared without a trace in only three years.


54 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Archaeomagnetism. You know that a compass needle lines
up with Earth’s magnetic north pole. In the same way, iron
particles in heated clay or in soil such as the floor of a hearth
align with Earth’s magnetic field. When the clay or soil cools,
the particles are locked in that alignment.
Over the centuries, the location of the magnetic north
pole has drifted hundreds of miles. Geologists have charted the
pole’s travels, pinpointing where it has been at specific times
over thousands of years. By analyzing a hearth found in a site,
it is possible to figure out which direction the iron particles in
the soil were being pulled when the particles, heated by fire,
aligned with the magnetic north pole. Using the geologists’ map
of pole migration, archaeologists can estimate the hearth’s age.
Documentation. Historical accounts and settlement records
may contain information that pinpoints dates of artifacts. For
example, in 1609 a man visiting the Jamestown settlement in
Virginia drew a map of that village, the first English settlement
in North America. Archaeologists today use the old map as
one source to help them find the remains of the early walls
and buildings of Jamestown.
Obsidian Hydration. A less reliable dating method is obsidian
hydration. Obsidian is a volcanic glass. Because it can be bro-
ken and shaped into cutting tools with very sharp edges, many
ancient peoples used obsidian to make knives and arrowheads.
For more about
Earth’s magnetic
field, see the
Electricity merit
badge pamphlet.
Iron particles in heated clay or soil align with Earth’s magnetic field. Because
the magnetic north pole changes location with time, archaeologists can use the
alignment of the iron particles to figure out the age of a hearth or, as in this
illustration, a clay pottery kiln. Archaeologists call this technique magnetic dating.


ARCHAEOLOGY 55
.How Archaeology Happens
When obsidian is broken, the freshly exposed, clean surfaces
absorb moisture. The rate of absorption depends heavily on the
climate—some areas are more moist than others. Sometimes,
scientists can study an obsidian artifact under a microscope
and tell by the amount of moisture it has absorbed how old it
is. Because the rate of absorption may vary greatly, however,
this dating method can be unreliable.
Many ancient peoples discovered that they could use obsidian—a volcanic glass—to
create cutting tools with razor-sharp edges. These obsidian arrowheads come from the
Nightfire Island site in Oregon.
Monks Mound is a prehistoric Mississippian site at Cahokia, near East St. Louis, Illinois.


56 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Interpretation
From excavating sites and analyzing artifacts, archaeologists get
raw data: facts. The next step is interpretation—the process of
giving meaning to the data.
Imagine an arrow point found at Cahokia, the site of a
large and complex prehistoric American Indian community in
present-day Illinois. Analysis shows that the point was made of
chert from Arkansas, but the style of the point indicates that it
was made in Oklahoma. One interpretation of this data is that
the Cahokians traded over long distances.
By interpreting the great body of material that has been
recovered from Cahokia, archaeologists have formed many
ideas about how the Cahokians traded, farmed, fished, hunted,
celebrated, built houses, defended themselves, and otherwise
met their basic needs.
The ways in which groups of people have satisfied their
basic needs have differed from place to place and through the
ages. These differences have made each culture—like the cul-
ture of Cahokia—unique. These differences have led to the rich
mix of human cultures that we see around the world today.
Archaeologists studying sites and artifacts are interested
in how people of the past fulfilled their basic needs. As they
interpret how various groups lived, archaeologists help us
better understand how our own culture has been built on the
foundations of cultures that came before.
Through the study of the past, we can see how various
groups of people rose to the challenge of everyday living and
found ways to satisfy their needs and solve the problems they
faced. We can also see how some groups failed in their efforts,
and perhaps we can learn from those failures.
All people have basic needs, no matter when or where they live.
Among the most important of people’s basic needs are
• The need for water and food
• The need for shelter from the weather (housing and clothing)
• The need to understand and adapt to the world through their culture,
including lifeways, philosophy, science, and religion
• The desire to pass on their culture to their children and future generations
The environment
and changes that
took place over
time may pose
major challenges
to site and artifact
interpretation. For
example, artifacts
can be significantly
decayed if the area
is not hospitable to
organic material
preservation. Or
the site may have
been exposed to
natural forces
such as fires
or earthquakes.


ARCHAEOLOGY 57
.How Archaeology Happens
A Scout Troop’s Archaeological Good Turn
An archaeological site in an area overseen by the Bureau of Land
Management was being damaged by wandering livestock. A Scout troop
from a town nearby volunteered to help build a fence around the site.
For several days, the Scouts worked on the fence. To thank them for
their efforts, the BLM arranged for the Scouts to spend time with
archaeologists and other specialists who studied the site inside the fence.
The Scouts got to practice some experimental archaeology by learning
the basics of flint knapping to make arrowheads. They also learned about
the American Indians who had lived at the site hundreds of years earlier.
The fence that the Scouts built still protects the site. The Scouts also
have a new respect for the ancient people whose home was not far from
their own. As protectors of the past, they have enriched their own present.


58 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Ethnographic Analogy and Experimental Archaeology
The people archaeologists study sometimes are no longer around
to explain how they made and used the artifacts they left behind.
Two methods that researchers can use to interpret past lifeways
are ethnographic analogy and experimental archaeology.
What’s an ethnographic analogy? You can get an idea by
looking at the two parts of the phrase. Ethnography is the method
by which anthropologists study other cultures. To make an analogy
is to assume that if two things agree with one another in some
ways, they probably will agree in other ways as well.
So, if two cultures are alike in some ways, they probably
will be alike in other ways. To find clues about how people
lived in the past, researchers can study the native peoples who
still live in an area or who make items similar to artifacts that
have been found in archaeological sites. No groups like the
earliest hunters still live in North America, for example, but
hunting peoples do live today in Australia and Africa. Those
groups can give us information on hunting techniques and tool
making, which—by analogy—we can use to interpret and better
understand the habits and activities of ancient peoples.
Experimental archaeologists on Easter Island set out to show how the huge stone
heads might have been made and moved.


ARCHAEOLOGY 59
.How Archaeology Happens
In the second method—experimental archaeology—
researchers try to re-create the items in question. Scientists can
gain a greater understanding of ancient tools, weapons, pottery,
fabrics, baskets, and other artifacts by trying to produce similar
items themselves.
For example, experimental archaeologists might gather the
same kinds of plant fibers used to make ancient baskets, then
try to figure out how to weave the fibers into baskets similar
to those found in excavated sites. By experimenting with plant
fibers, they may discover how long it took to make a basket
and which fibers were best for different kinds of baskets.
Experimental archaeologists might also try making pottery
from the same clays prehistoric peoples used to learn how hot
the fire needed to be, what firewoods worked best, and how
many pots typically broke during the firing. Or they might
experiment with different methods of chipping flint to shape
it into points for arrows and spears.
Sometimes, these experiments turn into great adventures.
A Norwegian explorer and writer named Thor Heyerdahl
believed that, long ago, people sailed across the Pacific Ocean
from South America to the islands of Tahiti, Fiji, and Easter.
To test his theory, he used plans more than a thousand years
old to build a boat called the Kon-Tiki.
Heyerdahl sailed the Kon-Tiki
4,300 miles to Tahiti.
His experiment helped
expand our understanding
of the cultures of the
South Pacific and
their relationship
to South America.
To show that South American Indians could have migrated to Pacific islands,
in 1947 Thor Heyerdahl and a small crew sailed the Kon-Tiki from Peru to the
islands of Polynesia. The Kon-Tiki, made of balsa, was modeled after rafts
used by Peruvians in ancient times.


60 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Your Own
Experimental Archaeology
For requirement 11(b), you are to use the methods of
experimental archaeology to re-create an item or to
practice a skill from the past. Some merit badge
skills may come in handy to fulfill this requirement.
Consider Basketry (weaving a basket such as one
an early American Indian might have used), Indian Lore
(demonstrating traditional methods of hunting or
fishing), Pioneering (rope making), Pottery (making
a clay pot or figurine), Textile (weaving a belt or
headband), or Wood Carving (carving a decorative
or useful or item).
Plan your experimental archaeology project to help
you answer a question about a culture that interests
you. For instance, maybe you would like to know how
the Makah Indians of northwestern Washington have
made their distinctive cone-shaped rain hats. Begin
by studying pictures or, if possible, a museum exhibit
that shows some hats in detail. Try to see how they
are constructed. Get a supply of suitable materials
(see the Basketry merit badge pamphlet for tips).
Then practice until you have re-created a rain hat
of similar shape and size.
Try out your
finished experiment.
Does your hat
keep your
head dry
outdoors in
the rain?
Traditional
Makah rain hat


ARCHAEOLOGY 61
.How Archaeology Happens
Preservation
Once objects have been excavated, they must be preserved so
that they do not decay any further. In the field, archaeologists
must sometimes act quickly to protect artifacts as soon as they
are uncovered. Upon opening a tomb at Jericho, for example,
archaeologists discovered that all of the wooden furniture in the
tomb was crumbling to dust upon exposure to the air. To save
it, they coated the furniture with wax to seal it from the air.
In cases other than emergencies, most conservation work is
done in laboratories. Specialists called conservators use a variety
of techniques to clean objects, stop the chemical and biological
processes of decay, and protect the artifacts so that no more
decay happens.
Some organic
materials must
be kept cold to
prevent decay.
The Iceman’s
body, for example,
is kept in a
refrigerated
display case in a
museum in Italy.An Imperfect Picture
Even in dry climates, the perfect preservation of all
items that people once used is rare. Many objects rot
and disintegrate, leaving no trace for an archaeologist
to find. Therefore, investigators get only an imperfect
picture of past cultures. Putting the picture together from
an incomplete set of clues is like trying to assemble a
jigsaw puzzle that has many pieces missing.
Try this: Make a list of all of the objects found in
your bedroom. Then mark through every other item
on your list.
If Scouts of the future could examine all of the
items on your first list, what would they be able to
learn about you? If they could look at only the objects
on your second, incomplete list, how might their
ideas about you be different? What would they learn
about you and your life if they had only a partial or
fragmentary set of objects from your bedroom to
study? Do you think they would get an imperfect
picture of who you are?
This is the same problem that archaeologists face.
Large gaps often exist in the evidence they collect,
making it impossible to build up a complete picture
of the people they are studying.


62 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Conserving Organic Materials
Organic materials such as wood and leather that have soaked
up water become soft and weak. They deteriorate rapidly when
exposed to the air. It is important to keep such artifacts from
drying out and cracking. To preserve them, conservators may
place the objects in tanks of water or wrap them in plastic to
keep them damp and away from the air.
Treatment may also involve applying special chemicals
or bathing the artifacts in warm, liquid wax. The wax slowly
replaces the moisture in wood and leather, then hardens, which
strengthens the objects and keeps them from rotting. This treat-
ment was used to preserve the leather and wood objects that
belonged to the mummified Iceman found in the Alps in 1991.
The conservation and curation (long-term care) of archaeological finds
has become a highly specialized field. If the few details given here have
piqued your curiosity, you can learn more by talking with the curator of a
local museum. The curator can explain the uses of special preservation
materials such as acid-free paper, and show you how temperature and
humidity are controlled inside display cases, how maps and papers are
stored, and how fragile objects are handled to avoid damage.


ARCHAEOLOGY 63
.How Archaeology Happens
Organic materials can also be freeze-dried—the same
process used to make instant coffee granules. Materials are
first frozen, then placed in a vacuum chamber where the ice
crystals turn to gas; over a period of weeks, the gas is drawn
off. Once dried, the artifacts are strong enough to be handled.
Conservators use freeze-drying for preserving artifacts such as
the wooden bowls soaked with seal oil that came from the
Ozette site, and items of grass that were found with the
Iceman.
Conserving Metal
Metals react with oxygen to form metal
oxides such as iron oxide (rust). This process
breaks down the structure of the metal. Most metal
artifacts come out of the earth badly decayed and
encrusted with oxides.
To clean metal objects, conservators may
spray them with a jet of hard particles to scour
away the rust. Chemicals may also be used to
remove encrustations and stop further rusting.
Then a sealant, such as a protective coat of
polyester resin, may be applied to the artifact.


64 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Artifact Storage
Artifacts are cataloged and stored so that they can be located
easily by people who want to study them. Fragile items such
as old clothing or paper documents may require storage where
exposure to light and other conditions can be controlled.
Ultraviolet light is harmful to nearly all organic materials.
Direct sunlight is the most damaging, but some types of artificial
lighting can also produce UV light. Special lightbulbs and light-
ing techniques may be used to protect artifacts from UV damage.
Objects must also be protected against damage from heat,
humidity, desiccation (drying out), dust, rodents, and insects.
Paper records and photographs of excavations are preserved in
special acid-free containers.


ARCHAEOLOGY 65
.How Archaeology Happens
Site Protection
It may take months or even years after a site has been discov-
ered before it is fully excavated. At times when archaeologists
are not actively working at a site, the area may be in danger
from pothunters illegally searching for treasures. Rain and wind
might erode the soil. People in motor vehicles or on bicycles
might not realize that they are going through and damaging a
sensitive area.
Volunteers often are able to help
archaeologists protect sites and monitor
the condition of a site until excavation
can be completed. Volunteers might visit
a site once a month to make a written
and photographic record. They might
help build barriers to keep out people
and animals. Or they might assist in
concealing a site so that it does
not attract attention.
Vandalized site at Zion National Park, Utah


66 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Information Sharing
Archaeologists have many ways to share the information they
have gathered. Through academic journals and conferences,
they exchange information with professional colleagues.
Through books, magazine articles, educational television
programs, films, and the internet, archaeologists can reach
large audiences. Displays and exhibits in museums, historical
parks, and visitor centers at archaeological sites encourage
the public to view artifacts and learn about the sites where
the items were found.
Archaeologists may visit schools and give public lectures.
As teachers in colleges and universities, they can expand the
methods used to study the past and can train new generations
of archaeologists.
How to Learn More
Archaeologists are dedicated to sharing information. That’s good
news for you, because it means you should have no trouble
finding experts who are willing to help you learn more about
the field.
Begin by joining the archaeology club at school, if there
is one. Archaeology clubs have sprung up in many junior and
senior high schools across the nation. The clubs generally have
ties to local colleges, universities, and museums. If there isn’t an
archaeology club in your school, maybe you could organize one.
Archaeologists often speak to groups at parks and other sites that attract visitors.


ARCHAEOLOGY 67
.How Archaeology Happens
Or, attend the meetings of a local history or archaeology
society. Each of the 50 states has at least one archaeological
society. (See the resources section of this pamphlet or ask your
merit badge counselor to help you contact your local society.)
The state organization or its local chapters will probably spon-
sor lectures by professional archaeologists, tours of nearby sites,
or exhibits of archaeological materials from the area.
If possible, visit a large university that has an active
program in archaeology and operates its own field project.
Ask to see how archaeologists work in the laboratory, study
and catalog artifacts, make site maps, and prepare reports
on their excavations.
Visit a local museum that displays archaeological artifacts
from your area. Ask if there are museum school classes that
teach interested amateurs the techniques of excavating, preserv-
ing, or displaying artifacts.
Visit archaeological sites or excavations. About 400 archae-
ological sites or museums in the United States and Canada are
listed in the books America’s Ancient Treasures by
Franklin and Mary Elting Folsom, and Exploring Ancient Native
America: An Archaeological Guide by David Hurst Thomas.
(See the resources section for more information on these and
other books.)


68 ARCHAEOLOGY
How Archaeology Happens.
Get your entire Scout troop involved. Invite an archaeolo-
gist to speak to your troop or other group. You might invite
your state historic preservation officer or state archaeologist
(see the resources section), a speaker from an archaeology or
history group that is active in your area, or an archaeologist
who works for a private company that does archaeological
research or surveys.
Better yet, your troop could arrange an archaeological
outing. Perhaps the curator of a local museum or an anthropol-
ogist at a nearby college or university could give you a group
tour of the facility and talk about its archaeological programs.
Or arrange a group visit to a state or national historical park,
an archaeological site under the jurisdiction of a land manage-
ment agency such as the USDA Forest Service or the Bureau
of Land Management, or a nearby military base that employs
an archaeologist.
Parkin Archeological State Park in Arkansas preserves the site
of a Mississippian-period American Indian village that is dated
at a.d. 1350 to 1550.


ARCHAEOLOGY 69
.How Archaeology Happens
In the 1960s at Abu Simbel in Egypt, the
colossal statues of Pharaoh Ramses II
and his queen, Nefertari, were moved to
higher ground to escape the rise of the
Nile River behind the new Aswân High
Dam. The sandstone figures were cut into
huge blocks, then reassembled about
200 feet above the original site, out of reach
of the lake’s rising waters. The massive
rescue effort was paid for by Egypt, the
United States, and dozens of other
countries through an international
partnership led by UNESCO.


A mock dig gives hands-on experience when it is not possible to work at an
actual site. As part of activities conducted by the Dallas Archeological Society
for Archaeology Awareness Week, young people excavated this mock site at
Old City Park in Dallas, Texas.


ARCHAEOLOGY 71
.Dig This
Dig This
You have read about archaeology, what it is, and how the work
is done. You’ve gone to meetings of the local archaeological
society, talked with professionals, and visited sites or museums.
The next step is to get hands-on experience at a professionally
supervised archaeological excavation. In other words, it’s time
to go on a dig. How do you volunteer?
• Check with your state archaeological society. It may
have an annual field school in which you can participate.
Many archaeological societies conduct workshops and other
events as well as field sessions. The events generally are
run by professionals or trained avocational archaeologists
and are open to society members and the public.
• Call a museum or university in your area. Archaeologists
on the staffs of museums and universities often need
volunteers to work in the research projects they direct.
Some universities and colleges are opening archaeological
field schools to people who aren’t enrolled as undergradu-
ate or graduate students.
• Check with your local, county, and state governments.
There may be archaeological programs in or near your
community that use volunteers. The cities of Annapolis
and Baltimore, Maryland, and Alexandria, Virginia, for
example, have active programs in volunteer archaeology.
So do Fairfax County, Virginia, and Prince George’s County,
Maryland. To find out if programs exist in your community,
contact the local parks department, planning department,
historic-preservation office, or museums.
• Subscribe to the e-Traveler, a free newsletter (Passport in
Time Clearinghouse, P.O. Box 15728, Rio Rancho, NM 87174-
5728; toll-free telephone 800-281-9176; website
passportintime.com). Passport in Time is a nationwide
volunteer archaeology and historic preservation program of
Everywhere
you go, ask
about volunteer
opportunities.
Maybe the
laboratory you
visited could
use a part-time
volunteer. Is there
an archaeological
excavation in
progress in your
area? Find out if
you or your troop
could help out.


72 ARCHAEOLOGY
Dig This.
the USDA Forest Service. Volunteers work with professional
archaeologists and historians on projects including
excavation, restoration, and research. There is no fee to
participate.
• Check with local units of other federal agencies, including
the Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Reclamation,
the Army Corps of Engineers, and the National Park Service.
In some areas of the country, these federal agencies offer
volunteers a chance to participate in archaeological investiga-
tions. For example, the San Juan Mountains Association in
Durango, Colorado, works with the San Juan National Forest
and the Bureau of Land Management in its cultural site
stewardship program, which trains volunteers to monitor
archaeological sites.
• Look in the magazine Archaeology. Each year, the magazine
publishes a guide to excavations in the Americas and around
the world at which individuals can work. Recent guides have
listed dozens of projects in more than half the states in the
United States.
• See the Archaeological Fieldwork
Opportunities Bulletin, a resource of
the Archaeological Institute of
America, for a listing
of field schools and excavation
programs that need volunteer help
(see the resources section).
• With your parent or guardian’s
permission, research on the
internet. Look for legitimate groups
working with professional
archaeologists.
Some digs require archaeologists to
work underwater. For instance, this
steamboat wreck is visible from the
riverbank only during times of drought;
to get the ”big picture,“ archaeologists
must look below the water‘s surface.


ARCHAEOLOGY 73
.Dig This
• In some states, site stewards are trained to monitor important
archaeological sites for erosion, vandalism, and other types
of damage. Their findings are reported to the state’s site
stewardship program for further action. Contact your state
historic preservation office to see if they have such a pro-
gram and how you can participate.
• Several international organizations protect archaeological
sites, including the UNESCO World Heritage Program and the
International Council on Monuments and Sites (ICOMOS).
Both organizations need support from citizens throughout
the world.
• Contact the following organizations, which place volunteers
and students into archaeological field projects directed by
professionals. Some of these organizations charge for their
services, so be sure to ask about costs. Volunteers pay for
their own travel, room, and board. They must be prepared to
work hard. Because of the amount of training given to volun-
teers, most professionals will expect volunteers to commit to
work for at least one week.
Center for American Archeology
Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
Earthwatch Institute
Canyon Country Discovery Center
Mississippi Valley Archaeology Center
Simulated Archaeological Site Project
Simulated archaeological sites can be constructed in a vari-
ety of forms. They can range in size from a shoebox to a full-
sized replica or scale map of a real archaeological site.
Simulated site projects do not have to involve excavation or
removal of artifacts from their context. You can record and map
the location of real artifacts and features, then analyze the arti-
facts and features in the context of the original site. Or you
might classify the artifacts, if they are being temporarily
removed from their original location. Here are some options:
• With the help of a qualified archaeologist, your merit badge
counselor can build a simulated excavation site or a mock
dig, and then provide guidance as you excavate, analyze the
artifacts you remove, and interpret the data. If you can assist
For more
information about
the resources
and opportunities
mentioned on
these pages,
see the resources
section at the end
of this pamphlet.


74 ARCHAEOLOGY
Dig This.
with constructing the simulated site, you’ll learn even more
as a result. Participate as if it were a real excavation. You
should record all artifacts and features in their original loca-
tion, excavate in stratigraphic layers or prescribed arbitrary
levels, and take extensive notes on your procedures and find-
ings. (Note: Simulated site projects, when done well, require
a lot of work and time to build and excavate. Archaeology
education professionals have found a simulated excavation
may not be as rich an experience as studying authentic data
from a real archaeological site. However, if you need to take
this option, the Archaeological Institute of America provides
some guidance for simulated excavations at
archaeological.org/pdfs/education/digs/Digs_basics.pdf.)
• Alternatively, a qualified archaeologist can build a recon-
struction of an archaeological site in a box and fill it with
unprovenienced artifacts or artifact replicas. Then you can
analyze the artifacts in the context of the site. If real artifacts
are being removed from their original location, keep a writ-
ten record of where they were found and make sure to return
them once the project is completed.
• With the assistance of a qualified archaeologist, locate a map
of an archaeological site. Draw the site map to scale and
include the location of each artifact and various features at
the site. Again, if artifacts are removed from the site, record
the location of each one and return them upon completion of
the project. Project Archaeology (see the resources section)
provides maps of archaeological sites and drawings of arti-
facts in the curriculum guide Project Archaeology:
Investigating Shelter.


ARCHAEOLOGY 75
.Dig This
Two options for a simulated site are to reconstruct an existing archaeological project
with artifacts placed in context (top), or to create a map of an authentic archaeological
site with artifact cards.


Nautical, or underwater, archaeologists investigate submerged sites such as
flooded cities and shipwrecks, as well as partially wet sites, including mills,
dams, bridge footings, ferry crossings, and wharves.


ARCHAEOLOGY 77
.Careers in Archaeology
Careers in Archaeology
What does it take to be a professional archaeologist? Three
important qualities are curiosity, patience, and the willingness
to work hard.
Field work in archaeology is a combination of demanding
physical labor and careful scholarship. It takes stamina to
excavate a site and patience to accurately record all of the infor-
mation uncovered in the process of digging. An investigator
in the field might wield a pick and shovel one day, then take
up a trowel and brushes for the delicate, painstaking work of
unearthing and cleaning fragile artifacts. Laboratory work
also requires great patience, as archaeologists may spend years
analyzing and interpreting their finds.
The temple of Mayan god Kukulcán surmounts El Castillo, a large pyramid at
Chichén Itzá in Yucatán, Mexico.


78 ARCHAEOLOGY
Careers in Archaeology.
If you ask a dozen professional archaeologists why
they chose their career, you’ll probably get a dozen different
answers. Archaeologists follow their own interests. One reason
that many people find this an appealing profes-
sion is that it lets them satisfy their curiosity
about a vanished culture, a remote area,
a period in history, or some intriguing
aspect of the human past. One trait that
is common to all archaeologists is
curiosity—a strong curiosity about
the lost cultures and ancient ways
of life that helped to shape the world
we live in today.
Education and
Training Required
The education and training you will
need to become a professional archaeologist
depend on what kind of archaeology you
want to do. To work as a field archaeologist
and to do basic laboratory studies, you
must have at least a bachelor of arts
or a bachelor of science degree with
a major in anthropology.
The anthropology departments of universities in the
United States usually include archaeology as one of four
subdisciplines. The other three are physical anthropology,
cultural anthropology, and linguistics. Few universities have
separate archaeology departments.
A major in anthropology might involve courses in all four
of the subdisciplines. The courses required for the bachelor’s
degree might include introductory anthropology and broad,
general survey courses in physical anthropology (biological
variation and adaptation in humans) and linguistics (human
speech and language). There might also be courses in cultural
anthropology (human cultures and customs). Courses in
archaeology usually focus on specific areas of the world like
North America or Asia, on types of human behavior such as
social organization or religion, or on facets of the field such as
nautical, classical, or historical archaeology.


ARCHAEOLOGY 79
.Careers in Archaeology
Students of archaeology study a variety of subjects, includ-
ing many sciences. The scientific analysis of sites and artifacts
requires a knowledge of geology, paleontology, physics, chemis-
try, botany, zoology, and statistics.
Interdisciplinary programs that combine archaeology with
various other fields of study are common. Students who wish to
study ancient civilizations or historical archaeology, for example,
will probably have courses in art, architecture, classics, history,
ancient and modern languages, theology, and folklore.
Historical archaeologists usually major in anthropology
or history. For students interested in ancient and classical
civilizations, it is a good idea to begin learning several ancient
and modern languages (for example, Greek, Latin, German,
and French).
To work as a field archaeologist, previous experience is
often required (usually obtained by spending a summer in an
archaeological field school or participating as a volunteer).
Archaeological field schools provide the best way to learn how
to properly excavate and document archaeological sites, and
also to find out if archaeology is the career for you.
You can begin now to prepare for your college coursework
by taking all of the science, history, and language classes you
can. Strong communication skills are vital to an archaeologist,
so you’ll need a good grounding in writing, speech, and foreign
languages. Courses in writing, computers (including global
information systems), and desktop publishing will help in
producing research papers and field reports, and writing
requests for grants.
It’s a good idea to keep a scrapbook of newspaper and
magazine articles or a computer file of internet sources about
new discoveries. Many exciting finds are so recent that they
don’t yet appear in the history books.
Read Widely
Most libraries have many excellent books and maga-
zines about archaeology. The resources section at the
end of this pamphlet lists some recommended titles,
but the list barely scratches the surface of all that is
available. Visit your local library and ask a librarian
to help you find information.


80 ARCHAEOLOGY
Careers in Archaeology.
Graduate Study
While a bachelor’s degree will qualify you to work on an archae-
ological field crew, it won’t allow you to move into a supervisory
role. Supervisory positions require a graduate degree.
There are two levels of graduate training in archaeology.
The first is a master of arts or master of science degree,
which takes about one to two years of coursework beyond
the bachelor’s degree. Graduate students may take advanced,
specialized courses, such as courses in dating techniques or
seminars on hieroglyphic writing.
Many master’s programs require students to be able to read
at least one foreign language. You should choose a language
that will be helpful in your future research. If you plan to do
research in South America, for example, Spanish would be the
logical choice.
Earning a master’s degree usually requires the student
to prepare a written thesis that presents the results of the
student’s original research. A master’s degree with a thesis
and a year of field and laboratory experience is the minimum
requirement needed for certification by the Register of
Professional Archaeologists.


ARCHAEOLOGY 81
.Careers in Archaeology
A master’s degree would qualify you to direct field crews
and is enough for many government jobs in archaeology. It is
also sufficient to work for a private company, to teach in a
community college, and to work for some museums.
The second graduate degree is the doctoral degree, which
is required to become a professor at many four-year colleges or
universities. The Ph.D. degree requires two to three years of
courses beyond the master’s. The student must successfully pre-
pare and defend a dissertation that contains original research in
the student’s chosen area of specialization.
The dissertation is normally a book-length document.
Researching and writing a dissertation shows that the student
is able to pursue scientific inquiry by choosing a particular
problem and solving it logically through field research or
laboratory work.
Some graduate programs offer streamlined tracks for
students with a bachelor’s degree so that they work directly
toward a Ph.D. Other programs require a master’s degree first.
Most foreign
governments will
issue excavation
permits only to
archaeologists
with a Ph.D.
degree. This
means that
opportunities
to direct field
projects outside
the United States
are limited to
professional
archaeologists
with a doctoral
degree.
Nearly a thousand years ago, Leif Eriksson led Viking explorers to
the eastern coast of North America. At a Viking settlement site at
L’Anseaux-Meadows, Newfoundland, Canada, this Viking-built
structure from the year 1000 has been reconstructed.


82 ARCHAEOLOGY
Careers in Archaeology.
Areas of Specialization
Most archaeologists end up specializing rather narrowly in a
particular area of interest. Some work in historical archaeology.
Others study the prehistoric past. Some excel at fieldwork.
Others enjoy using computers to test their ideas. While one
professional might specialize in ceramic technology or ancient
calendar systems, another might become an expert on the
cultures of the American Southwest or an authority on 19th-cen-
tury army posts in Montana.
It’s too soon for you to think much about choosing a spe-
cialty. If you are preparing for a career in archaeology, you will
be studying a wide variety of subjects from now until you earn
a bachelor’s degree. By the time you get to graduate school,
you’ll have enough experience to know what aspect of archae-
ology strongly interests you and appeals to you as a specialty.


ARCHAEOLOGY 83
.Careers in Archaeology
Where Archaeologists Work
Professional archaeologists work for universities, colleges, non-
profit organizations, museums, the federal government, and
state governments; in private companies; and as consultants.
They teach, conduct field investigations, analyze artifacts and
sites, and publish the results of their research.
Academic Positions. Faculty members at colleges and univer-
sities not only teach but also do research, including fieldwork,
and publish the results. Most faculty positions are nine-month
appointments. During the summer, academic archaeologists
conduct field research, teach summer school, teach summer
field schools, or work as private consultants. They may get
the funds to do their research from their school, from federal
agencies such as the National Science Foundation and the
National Endowment for the Humanities, and from private
foundations such as the National Geographic Society, Earthwatch,
and others. Within colleges and universities, archaeologists
are found in the departments of anthropology, art history,
architecture, classics, geology, history, sociology, and theology.
Museum Positions. Museum curators conduct research,
publish the results, give public presentations, prepare displays,
and conserve the collections of the museum. Museum positions
require a graduate degree.


84 ARCHAEOLOGY
Careers in Archaeology.
State and Federal Government Positions. Federal and state
laws that protect the environment include protection for impor-
tant archaeological sites. As a result, the government is involved
in managing archaeological sites on federal and state lands such
as parks and forests.
Not surprisingly, therefore, the federal government employs
many archaeologists. The USDA Forest Service, National Park
Service, Bureau of Land Management, and the U.S. Army Corps
of Engineers all have archaeologists. Most government positions
require a master’s degree.
Many archaeologists also work for state government agen-
cies. Every state has a state historic preservation office with one
or more archaeologists on staff. In addition, archaeologists work
in state parks departments, highway departments, and water
resource departments. Some cities also hire archaeologists to
be responsible for local archaeological sites.
Construction projects often require archaeological surveys
to locate prehistoric or historic sites. If sites are found, decisions
must be made about excavating some or all of the sites before
construction begins. Federal and state archaeologists are involved
in making those decisions and supervising the archaeologists
who do the work. This kind of archaeology is called cultural
resources management (CRM).
Among the Mayan ruins at Uxmal, Yucatán, Mexico, is the Pyramid of the Magician.


ARCHAEOLOGY 85
.Careers in Archaeology
Private Sector Archaeologists. Archaeologists also work for
firms that direct the CRM investigations required by law. They
conduct archaeological surveys and excavate significant sites
before those sites are destroyed by construction activities.
Private sector archaeologists work in the field, in the labo-
ratory analyzing the results of their field investigations, and in
the office writing reports on those investigations and preparing
proposals to conduct additional work. They may work for labo-
ratories or centers within colleges and universities, for engineer-
ing and environmental companies, for companies specializing
in archaeological investigations, or as private consultants. These
organizations also hire field archaeologists as temporary staff to
assist with field investigations.
Field positions usually require a bachelor’s degree and pre-
vious experience in an archaeological field school. Supervisory
positions in cultural resources management work require a
master’s degree.





ARCHAEOLOGY 87
.Archaeology in the Future
Archaeology in
the Future
Years from now, archaeologists of the future will examine sites
and artifacts from our age. What will they find? How will they
interpret our cultures? What exciting new tools will they use to
peer into the past?
Archaeologists in the future undoubtedly will develop
better and more sophisticated techniques for finding and
excavating sites, examining and interpreting finds, preserving
artifacts, and sharing information. New technology is likely to
affect nearly everything people do, archaeology included.
Computers will be used in many ways for mapping, artifact
classification, simulations, and analysis. Archaeologists in the
future may use deep-sea diving suits and computer-controlled
robots to investigate shipwrecks and other underwater remains
in ocean depths too cold or too deep for scuba diving.
Faster and more accurate dating methods may be developed.
Laser beams may be used to measure distances more accurately.
Breakthroughs in genetics, blood chemistry, and other sciences
will continue to add to our understanding of the human past.
Much will also be learned as future scientists take another
look at the artifacts, samples, field notes, maps, and other
records that today’s archaeologists take such pains to prepare
and preserve. As archaeologists develop better techniques, they
will revisit sites that have already been studied and they will
learn more. Today’s archaeologists are keeping intact some
ancient sites and portions of sites for exactly that reason: They
expect future generations of archaeologists to have better tools
for studying the sites.


88 ARCHAEOLOGY
Archaeology in the Future.
Aerial photography and satellites may come to play an even bigger role in
locating and investigating sites than they do now. LiDAR—light detecting
and ranging—is now becoming popular to map archaeological sites,
especially ones with above-ground structures such as buildings,
fortifications, and mounds. Archaeologists in the future may use
photographs taken from aircraft, satellites, and other remote-sensing
techniques, including radar scans and magnetic detection, to study sites
without actually excavating them or collecting artifacts. Scientists call this
nondestructive archaeology.
Aerial photographs from satellites may help future archaeologists locate and
study sites in remote parts of the world. This is a radar image of the region
around the site of the lost city of Ubar in southern Oman, on the Arabian
Peninsula. The ancient city was discovered in 1992 with the aid of remote
sensing data. This image was taken by a spaceborne radar on board the space
shuttle Endeavour.


ARCHAEOLOGY 89
.Archaeology in the Future
Saving the Past for the Future
Archaeological sites are irreplaceable. A site destroyed by
vandalism, modern development, or natural forces is gone
forever. It falls to us—the people who are alive today—to
take care of these valuable sites so that future researchers
can add to the knowledge of the past.
If we fail in our duty, then no new pieces can ever be
added to the incomplete picture that we have. What we know
now is all that we will ever know, for all of time. That’s food
for thought, isn’t it?
In January 1686, French explorers led by Sieur de La Salle watched in horror as the
Belle, their last ship, ran aground on a sandbar and was lost. The explorers were
stranded on a marshy stretch of the Texas Gulf Coast. They fell victim to disease,
deadly snakes, food shortages, and attacks by the Karankawas, the native people of
the area. In 1995, more than 300 years later, marine archaeologists found the French
ship lying under 12 feet of water, covered by sand and silt. The Belle is one of the
most historically important shipwrecks to be found in North America. The wreckage
yielded many artifacts, including an ornate bronze cannon about 6 feet long and
weighing about 700 pounds, bearing a royal crest. The scientific excavation and study
of these artifacts will allow archaeologists to reconstruct the lives of 17th-century
French explorers.


90 ARCHAEOLOGY
Scouting Literature
American Cultures, American Heritage,
Archery, Architecture, Art, Astronomy,
Basketry, Chemistry, Genealogy, Geology,
Indian Lore, Leatherwork, Metalwork,
Pioneering, Pottery, Scouting Heritage,
Sculpture, Surveying, Textile, and Wood
Carving merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Atalay, Sonya. Community-Based
Archaeology: Research with, by, and
for Indigenous and Local
Communities. University of
California Press, 2012.
Barnes, Trevor. Archaeology.
Kingfisher, 2004.
Colwell, Chip. Plundered Skulls and
Stolen Spirits: Inside the Fight to
Reclaim Native America’s Culture.
University of Chicago Press, 2017.
Constable, Nick. World Atlas
of Archaeology. Thalamus
Publishing, 2009.
Deetz, James. In Small Things Forgotten:
An Archaeology of Early American
Life. Anchor Books, 1996.
Devereux, Paul. Archaeology: The Study
of Our Past. Gareth Stevens, 2002.
Dubowski, Mark, and Cathy East
Dubowski. Ice Mummy: The
Discovery of a 5,000-Year-Old Man.
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2000.
Fagan, Brian M. Archaeologists:
Explorers of the Human Past.
Oxford University Press, 2003.
Fagan, Brian M. The Great Journey: The
Peopling of Ancient America.
University Press of Florida, 2004.
Folsom, Franklin, and Mary Elting
Folsom. America’s Ancient
Treasures, 4th ed. University of New
Mexico Press, 1993.
Giblin, James Cross. Secrets of the
Sphinx. Scholastic, 2004.
Greenberg, Lorna, and Margot F. Horwitz.
Digging Into the Past: Pioneers of
Archeology. Scholastic, 2001.
Archaeology Resources
Archaeology Resources.


ARCHAEOLOGY 91
.Archaeology Resources
Greene, Meg. Buttons, Bones and the
Organ-Grinder’s Monkey: Tales of
Historical Archaeology. Linnet
Books, 2001.
Hansen, Joyce, and Gary McGowan.
Breaking Ground, Breaking Silence:
The Story of New York’s African
Burial Ground. Henry Holt, 1998.
Harrison, Peter D. The Lords of Tikal:
Rulers of an Ancient Maya City.
Thames & Hudson, 2000.
Hawass, Zahi. Curse of the Pharaohs:
My Adventures With Mummies.
National Geographic Society, 2004.
Kelly, Robert L., and David Hurst
Thomas. Archaeology: Down to
Earth, 5th ed. Cengage
Learning, 2013.
Laubenstein, Karen J. Archaeology
Smart Junior: Discovering
History’s Buried Treasure.
Random House, 1997.
Lauber, Patricia. Who Came First?
New Clues to Prehistoric Americans.
National Geographic Society, 2003.
Lerner Geography Department.
Sunk! Exploring Underwater
Archaeology. Lerner, 1994.
Letts, Cali A. and Jeanne M. Moe. Project
Archaeology: Investigating Shelter.
Montana State University, 2009.
Lister, Robert H., and Florence C. Lister.
Those Who Came Before: Southwestern
Archeology in the National Park
System, 2nd ed. Southwest Parks and
Monuments Association, 1994.
Lourie, Peter. The Lost World of the
Anasazi: Exploring the Mysteries
of Chaco Canyon. Boyds Mills
Press, 2007.
McIntosh, Jane R. Eyewitness:
Archeology. DK Publishing, 2000.
Parcak, Sarah. Archaeology from Space:
How the Future Shapes Our Past.
Henry Holt, 2019.
Praetzellis, Adrian. Dug to Death: A
Tale of Archaeological Method and
Mayhem. AltaMira, 2003.
Putnam, James. Eyewitness: Pyramid.
DK Publishing, 2011.
Rathje, William L., and Cullen Murphy.
Rubbish! The Archaeology of Garbage.
University of Arizona Press, 2001.
Samford, Patricia, and David L.
Ribblett. Archaeology for Young
Explorers: Uncovering History at
Colonial Williamsburg. Colonial
Williamsburg Foundation, 1995.
Smith, K.C. Exploring for Shipwrecks.
Franklin Watts, 2000.
Thomas, David Hurst. Skull Wars:
Kennewick Man, Archaeology, And
The Battle For Native American
Identity. Basic Books, 2000.
Walker, Sally M., and Douglas W.
Owsley. Their Skeletons Speak:
Kennewick Man and the
Paleoamerican World. Carolrhoda
Books, 2012.
Wheatley, Abigail, and Struan Reid.
The Usborne Introduction to
Archaeology. Scholastic, 2005.
Yeager, C.G. Arrowheads and Stone
Artifacts: A Practical Guide for
the Amateur Archaeologist, 3rd ed.
WestWinds Press, 2016.


92 ARCHAEOLOGY
Archaeology Resources.
Organizations and Websites
American Anthropological
Association
2300 Clarendon Blvd., Suite 1301
Arlington, VA 22201
Telephone: 703-528-1902
americananthro.org
Archaeological Conservancy
1717 Girard Blvd. NE
Albuquerque, NM 87106
Telephone: 505-266-1540
archaeologicalconservancy.org
Archaeological Fieldwork
Opportunities Bulletin
archaeological.org/fieldwork/afob
Archaeological Institute of America
44 Beacon St.
Boston, MA 02108
Telephone: 857-305-9350
archaeological.org
Canyon Country Discovery Center
1117 N. Main St.
Monticello, UT 84535
Toll-free telephone: 800-525-4456
ccdiscovery.org
Center for American Archeology
P.O. Box 366
Kampsville, IL 62053
Telephone: 618-653-4316
caa-archeology.org
Center for the Study of
the First Americans
Department of Anthropology
Texas A&M University
College Station, TX 77843-4352
Telephone: 979-845-4046
liberalarts.tamu.edu/csfa
Crow Canyon Archaeological Center
23390 Road K
Cortez, CO 81321
Toll-free telephone: 800-422-8975
crowcanyon.org
Earthwatch Institute
1380 Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02135
Toll-free telephone: 800-776-0188
earthwatch.org
Elden Pueblo Archaeological Project
1824 S. Thompson St.
Flagstaff, AZ 86001
Telephone: 928-527-3600
aznaturalhistory.org/destinations/
elden-pueblo-project/
International Council on Monuments
and Sites (ICOMOS)
icomos.org/en/
Mississippi Valley
Archaeology Center
University of Wisconsin–La Crosse
1725 State St.
La Crosse, WI 54601
Telephone: 608-785-8463
mvac.uwlax.edu
National Association of
State Archaeologists
state-archaeologists.us


ARCHAEOLOGY 93
.Archaeology Resources
National Conference of State
Historic Preservation Officers
Suite 342 Hall of the States
444 N. Capitol St. NW
Washington, DC 20001
Telephone: 202-624-5465
ncshpo.org
National Park Service
1849 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20240
Telephone: 202-208-6843
nps.gov/history
Project Archaeology
2-128 Wilson Hall
Montana State University
Bozeman, MT 59717
Telephone: 406-994-6925
projectarchaeology.org
Society for American Archaeology
1111 14th St. NW, Suite 800
Washington, DC 20005-5622
Telephone: 202-789-8200
saa.org
Society for Historical Archaeology
13017 Wisteria Drive, No. 395
Germantown, MD 20874
Telephone: 301-972-9684
sha.org
UNESCO World Heritage Center
whc.unesco.org/en


94 ARCHAEOLOGY
Archaeology Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America gives special thanks
to archaeologists S. Alan Skinner,
Ph.D., president, AR Consultants Inc.,
Dallas, Texas, and Rita Folse Elliott,
education coordinator and research
associate for the LAMAR Institute in
Savannah, Georgia. We appreciate their
expertise, assistance, and willingness to
provide resources for the Archaeology
merit badge pamphlet. Dr. Skinner is
an Eagle Scout who first decided to
become an archaeologist after reading
in Boys’ Life (now Scout Life) magazine
about excavation at Philmont Scout
Ranch in northern New Mexico. His
first paying job as an archaeologist was
at Philmont.
Thanks to Southern Research
Historic Preservation Consultants Inc.,
Ellerslie, Georgia, for providing technical
expertise and support with photographs.
In particular, we appreciate Debra J.
Wells for her assistance. The company
takes on all types of archaeology-based
projects from historic preservation and
protection of cultural resources to the
study and preservation of underwater
archaeological sites.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
For their role in developing the
first edition (1997), Scouting America
extends thanks to the writers, Robert
Birkby and Deborah Lightfoot Sizemore
(who also assisted with this edition).
Thanks to Meliha S. Duran,
publications director, and David T.
Kirkpatrick, Ph.D., associate director,
Human Systems Research Inc.; and
Richard A. Brook, archaeologist,
Bureau of Land Management,
U.S. Department of the Interior.
At Philmont Scout Ranch, thanks
to Stephen Zimmer, director, Seton
Memorial Library and Philmont
Museum; the 1996 Indian Writings
camp staff; and the 1996 Valle Vidal
camp staff. Scouting America also
thanks Scouter Wayne T. “Tom” Willis,
Forest Frost of Lincoln, Nebraska, and
Joyce M. Williams, who served as a
staff member of the Fort Worth
Museum of Science and History, for
their help in securing photos for this
pamphlet.


ARCHAEOLOGY 95
.Archaeology Resources
Scouting America is grateful to the staff members at Elden Pueblo
Archaeological Project, Flagstaff, Arizona, for so graciously allowing us to
visit their facility and assisting us with photography. In particular, thanks
to Peter Pilles, forest archaeologist and project director, and to Lisa
Edmonson (shown here on-site, overseeing an excavation with Scouts),
program manager, whose cordial hospitality and enthusiasm for hands-on
learning make archaeology come to life.
The Elden Pueblo Archaeological Project provides educational
opportunities for young people who are interested in archaeology, under
professional supervision. The Elden Pueblo site comprises more than
60 rooms of the prehistoric Sinagua culture and a Hopi ancestral site.
The project, which is a “cooperative endeavor between the Coconino
National Forest, the Arizona Natural History Association, and the Arizona
Archaeological Society,” invites visitors to “join us in our quest to learn
about past and present Pueblo cultures by investigating the clues people
left behind.” For more information, visit the project’s website (with your
parent or guardian’s permission) at aznaturalhistory.org/destinations/
elden-pueblo-project. You may also write or call: Elden Pueblo
Archaeological Project, 1824 S. Thompson St., Flagstaff, AZ 86001;
telephone 928-527-3600.


96 ARCHAEOLOGY
Archaeology Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Department of Anthropology, University of
Arizona, courtesy—page 29 (garbologists)
DeSoto National Wildlife Refuge, U.S. Fish
and Wildlife Service, courtesy—page
17 (all artifacts)
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—pages 66
(books), 77, and 84
La Salle Shipwreck Project, Texas
Historical Commission, courtesy—
page 89
Midwest Archeological Center, National
Park Service, Lincoln, Nebraska,
courtesy—pages 20, 40, 43 (both),
and 65 (vandalized site)
NASA, courtesy—page 88
C. Garth Sampson, Department of
Anthropology, Southern Methodist
University, Dallas, Texas,
courtesy—pages 33, 51, and 55
(obsidian arrowheads)
S. Alan Skinner, AR Consultants,
Dallas, Texas, courtesy—pages 29
(vessel) and 45 (house)
Southern Research Historic Preservation
Consultants Inc., courtesy—pages
72 and 76 (both submerged sites)
Texas Archeological Research Laboratory,
University of Texas at Austin,
courtesy—pages 46 and 50 (both)
Brenda B. Whorton, Dallas, Texas,
courtesy—page 70
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 11
(Great Hall), 16, 26 (Hague Convention
blue shield), 34, 35 (Lascaux
pictographs), and 36
Wikipedia.org/D. Gordon E. Robertson,
courtesy—page 81
Wikipedia.org/Heironymous Rowe,
courtesy—page 10
Wikipedia.org/Skubastevew834,
courtesy—page 55 (Monks Mound)
Wikipedia.org/Bill Whittaker, courtesy—
page 38
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Tom Copeland—page 28
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 6, 7, 9, 13, 31, 35, 41, 45, 54, 59,
and 60
Brian Payne—page 62
Randy Piland—pages 32 and 42
Benjamin Pope—page 11 (Great Sphinx)