ARCHERY
STEM-Based


ARCHERY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35856
ISBN 978-0-8395-3259-0
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Scouting America Standards
The merit badge counselor must be sufficiently experienced
in archery activities to teach Scouts the necessary skills and
to respond effectively in the event of an emergency. We
recommend the counselor use the most current printing of the
Archery merit badge pamphlet, No. 35856; the Guide to Safe
Scouting, No. 34416; and the Scouting America National Range
and Target Activities Manual, No. 30931, for further details.
Archery Activities
Modern bows and arrows are potentially dangerous. It is
important for Scouts to understand what a projectile is, and
why any device that shoots a projectile at high speed must
be handled with care and respect and used only in approved
locations. As counselor, you must take responsibility to comply
with Scouting America requirements and with all state and
local laws. Additionally, you must ensure that all shooting
activities are conducted on established and clearly marked
target or field archery ranges with appropriate supervision by a
certified USA Archery Level 1 Instructor or a certified long-term
camp staff member (i.e., a National Camping School [NCS]
Range Activities Director; or a Rangemaster over age 18 who is
trained by a NCS Range Activities Director or by a USA Archery
Level 1 Instructor). The following are standards established for
bows and arrows used in Scouts BSA.
Safe Area or Course
A key part of the counselor’s responsibility is to know the range
or course for conducting archery activities and to determine
that it is well-suited and free of hazards. Safety procedures
include but are not limited to:
• Inspect the range before use for any conditions that might
pose a potential hazard to safe operation.
• Range flags must be flown while the range is in use.
• Range perimeter should be well-defined and the target line,
shooting line, and waiting line must be well-marked.
• All spectators and archers waiting to shoot must remain
behind the waiting line at all times.


ARCHERY 3
• Bows and arrows should be used only in supervised places
set aside for their use.
• On a field archery course or roving range, when searching for a
lost arrow, participants should leave their bow standing against
the target face and have a responsible person standing by to
intercept other archers who may follow. Stay on marked paths.
Travel the direction in which targets are marked.
Equipment Selection and Maintenance
The counselor should inspect all equipment to ensure bows,
bowstrings, and arrows are in safe condition and appropriate for
the Scout’s height and maturity. Care should be taken to break
and discard all cracked or fractured arrows. Draw a bowstring
only with a nocked arrow of proper length. Failure to do this may
result in overdrawing and breaking the bow or in personal injury.
Personal Safety Equipment
The counselor must ensure that each participant always wears
an arm guard and either a finger tab or glove while shooting.
Safety Procedures and Policies
Adherence to archery safety procedures and standards can
greatly reduce risk. These should be known and understood
by all participants, and the counselor must ensure compliance.
Here are some commonsense safety rules:
• A bow, like a firearm, must never be pointed at a person.
• Never release an arrow without being able to see its full,
clear path to the target.
• Before drawing a bow, make sure the range is clear of any
persons or animals and that the archer is straddling the
shooting line.
• Arrows should be nocked only on the shooting line at the
rangemaster’s signal and pointed only at the target.
• Stop shooting immediately on signal from the rangemaster or
if anyone crosses in front of or behind the target.
• Never shoot an arrow up into the air.
• Broadhead arrows are for those who are licensed to hunt.
They are not permitted in Scouting target archery activities.
Discipline
Scouts must respect their counselor and rangemaster at all
times and follow their direction. Participants should always
practice courtesy and good sportsmanship.


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Archery or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
4 ARCHERY


ARCHERY 5


6 ARCHERY


ARCHERY 7





ARCHERY 9
Contents
Bow and Arrow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Archery Safety Rules . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Archery Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Option A: Recurve Bows and Longbows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Option B: Compound Bows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Shooting a Bow and Arrow . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Archery Games and Tournaments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Archery Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
Archery Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 66





ARCHERY 11
.Bow and Arrow
Bow and Arrow
A Scout who picks up a bow and arrow
becomes heir to one of humankind’s
oldest legacies. Archery plays a large part
in stories of Cherokee hunters and is at
the heart of the Robin Hood legend. The
Huns were famous for their composite
ox-horn bows, and the Moguls of India
made bows entirely of steel. Archery
remains a living and vibrant sport that is
still practiced throughout the world.
The modern laminated recurve
and compound bows look little like the
primitive bows our ancestors used, but essentials of archery are
unchanged. A steady hand, a good eye, and a disciplined mind
are key for the modern archer.
Archery is a fun way to exercise minds as well as bodies.
The sport has dozens of variations. Many archers start with
target archery, shooting arrows at a five-color, 10-ring target. But
the sport also offers field archery, clout archery, 3-D archery,
action archery, walk-up rounds, and many others.
Newcomers will
find archery
challenging and
enjoyable.
If you already
are an archer,
then we hope to
increase your
understanding
and appreciation
of archery.
A composite bow is made of more than one material.
The first composite bows were made of wood, bone
or horn, and animal tendons. A laminated bow is a
composite bow made of layers of such materials that
have been glued together. A recurve bow curves back
on itself. A compound bow has a cable system that
makes the bow easier to draw. You will learn more as
you earn the Archery merit badge.





ARCHERY 13
.Archery Safety Rules
Archery Safety Rules
Archery is lots of fun, but fun can quickly turn into tragedy
unless every archer observes some commonsense safety rules.
As a Scout and an archer, you must learn and practice these
simple rules any time you are using a bow and arrow.
Archery Range Safety Rules
A. Five Range Safety Rules
1. Always walk on the range.
2. Keep your arrows in your quiver until told to shoot.
3. Only release the bow string when an arrow is nocked and
safely pointed toward the target
4. Leave dropped arrows on the ground until instructed to
retrieve them.
5. If there is an emergency on the range immediately alert
the Instructor.
B. Three Rules When Retrieving Arrows
1. Retrieve arrows only when the
shooting line is clear and the
range officer signals “Retrieve
your arrows.”
2. As you walk forward to the
target waiting line, pick up any
arrows on the ground (your
own and all others as well).
3. Only one archer at a time may
pull arrows from the target; all
others stand 6 feet back from the
target at the target waiting line.
Before you think
about using a
bow, learn these
safety rules and
make up your
mind to follow them every time
you are on an archery range or
anywhere else shooting a bow.
Remember that most accidents
are the result of carelessness
and thoughtlessness.


N
CLEARED SAFETY AREA
RECOMMENDED
MINIMUM 50 FEET
MAXIMUM 100 FEET
TARGETS
25
FEET
60
FEET
150
FEET
30
FEET BOW
RACK
ENTRANCE
TO RANGE
BENCHES BENCHES
9 FEET BEHIND
SHOOTING LINE
50 YARDS
40 YARDS
30 YARDS
20 YARDS
FENCING
OR ROPE
SOD COVER
WITHIN
FENCED AREA
SHOOTING
LINE
WAITING
LINE
EQUIPMENT
CABINET
ORIENTATION
TARP OR
SHELTER
10 YARDS
25
FEET


ARCHERY 15
.Archery Safety Rules
C. Range Commands
The whistle commands used on a range, and their related
verbal commands, are as follows.
1. Two blasts on a whistle—”Step to the shooting
line.” You may step to the shooting line and pick up
your bow. You may not pick up any arrows.
2. One blast on a whistle—”Commence shooting.”
You may pick up an arrow and shoot this end. When
you are done, put your bow in a bow stand and step
to the waiting line.
3. Three blasts on a whistle—”Retrieve your arrows.”
You may go downrange and retrieve your arrows.
Follow the three rules for retrieving arrows (above).
4. Four or more blasts on a whistle—”STOP!” or
“Cease fire!” Do not shoot. Immediately let down,
place your arrow in your quiver and your bow in its
stand, and step back to the waiting line until the
emergency is cleared.
General Archery Safety Rules
• Keep all arrows in their quiver until ready
to shoot.
• To carry arrows in your hands, carry them
securely with both hands around all of the arrows and with
your palms facing down. However, the best way to transport
an arrow is safely in its quiver.
• Be sure the area around and beyond your target is clear
before you shoot. Never draw a bow if anyone is in front
of the shooting line.
• Always aim and shoot at a definite target; never shoot just
for the sake of shooting. Be sure of your target and that it
is safe to shoot at it. If you are not sure, take a closer look.
If, after a closer look, you are still not sure, do not shoot.
• Shoot only at targets that are thick enough to stop your
arrow. Do not shoot if there is any chance your arrow might
ricochet (bounce off) from the target or other object and
hit someone.
• Use arrows that are the proper length for you. Arrows that
are too short can cause serious injury.
An end is the
number of arrows
shot (usually three
to six) during
one turn.
To let down is
to slowly relax
the bowstring
without releasing
the arrow.


16 ARCHERY
Archery Safety Rules.
• Never shoot an arrow up into the air.
• Walk, do not run, on the archery range. If you run, you
might accidentally cross in front of another group of archers,
step on arrows lying on the ground, or fall and trip into a
target and be injured by the arrows sticking out of it.
• When retrieving arrows from behind a target, particularly on a
field range or at an isolated target, lean your bow against the
face of the target or stick an arrow in the top of the target with
the fletching up. This will warn other archers that you are
behind the target.
• Always use proper safety equipment, including an arm guard
and a finger tab or glove. A bow sling is not required but is
recommended.
• Always inspect your equipment before shooting. Repair or
replace damaged equipment. Replace the bowstring when it
becomes worn.
• Always have an arrow on the string when shooting a bow.
Dryfiring—shooting a bow without an arrow—can seriously
damage a bow and possibly injure the archer. Never dryfire
a bow.
Laws on Archery
Many states and local communities have
laws governing archers. Some laws cover
ownership and registration of archery
tackle (equipment). Others govern hunting
and fishing with a bow and arrow.
A fletching refers
to an arrow’s
feathers or
plastic vanes.


ARCHERY 17
.Archery Safety Rules
Archery
equipment is
shown and
described in
the next section.
On the shooting range, the range officer or range-
master on duty serves as the person in charge. The
rangemaster is there to help ensure the safety of
all participants and bystanders, and to ensure the
range is a safe environment for archery shooting.
Therefore, for your own safety and the safety of
others, it is imperative that you respect the range-
master and follow all rules as posted.
Ask your merit badge counselor or members of a local
archery club about the laws in your area. Learn and
follow all state and local laws on using a bow.





ARCHERY 19
.Archery Equipment
Archery Equipment
Having the right equipment is as important as having proper
instruction in how to shoot. Your equipment should fit you and
fit the type of shooting you plan to do. Have an experienced
archer help you choose the right equipment.
The equipment you will need includes a bow (a longbow,
recurve bow, or compound bow), arrows and a quiver to hold
them, an arm guard, a tab or shooting glove, and a bow sling.
Arrows
An arrow has four parts: the shaft (body or stem), the nock
(notched tip), the fletching (feathers or vanes), and the point
(arrowhead). The index fletching is the odd-colored fletching
and is perpendicular (at right angles) to the slot in the nock.
POINTS
Different types of arrows have different points. The arrow in
the parts photo is a target arrow. Several other arrow points
also are shown on the next page. Broadheads are used for
bow hunting big game. The fish head is for bow fishing.
Blunts are used for practice and for hunting small game such
as squirrels and game birds. The field point is used when
shooting field rounds and when shooting at stumps and
hummocks on roving trips through fields and forests.
Choosing and shooting a compound bow is different
from choosing and shooting longbows and recurve
bows. In this pamphlet, see “Option A: Recurve Bows
and Longbows” or “Option B: Compound Bows” for
information about the type of bow you will be shooting.
Parts of
an arrow
NOCK
FLETCHING
INDEX
FLETCHING
SHAFT
POINT


20 ARCHERY
Archery Equipment.
FLETCHINGS
You also can tell arrows apart by their fletchings.
• Target arrows use small fletchings. These can be feathers
from 2 to 3 inches long or plastic vanes about 11/2 to
2 inches long.
• Flu-flu fletchings are used to limit the range of an arrow.
These fletchings are most often used on blunt-tipped arrows.
They slow the arrow’s flight and make it drop quickly.
• Hunting arrows use longer fletchings, usually 4 to 5 inches
long. The fletchings usually have a strong spiral that causes
the arrow to rotate, which improves its flight when the point
is a broadhead.
SHAFT MATERIALS
Modern arrow shafts are made from four principal materials:
wood, aluminum, fiberglass, or carbon fiber. Beginning archers
usually use arrows with wood shafts. Wood is the least expen-
sive shaft material and is popular with many archers. Port
Orford cedar from the Pacific Northwest is the preferred wood
shaft material because of its straight grain and light weight.
Wood was the only arrow shaft material until about 1947,
when aluminum shafts became available. Aluminum shafts
are straighter than wood and do not warp with humidity the
way wood does. An aluminum shaft will, however, bend if
it hits a hard surface with enough force. Bent shafts must be
straightened to be used safely.
Fiberglass shafts were introduced in the 1960s. Fiberglass
will stand up to more abuse than either wood or aluminum
shafts. Although fiberglass shafts are reasonably straight, they
are not as straight as good aluminum or carbon fiber shafts.
Fiberglass, the heaviest of all shaft materials, is more expensive
than wood but less expensive than aluminum or carbon fiber.
Types of fletchings
Different
arrow points
BROADHEAD
TARGET POINT
BLUNT
FISH HEAD
TARGET ARROW FLETCHING FLU-FLU FLETCHING


ARCHERY 21
.Archery Equipment
Carbon fiber shafts were introduced in 1983. They are the
lightest, strongest, and most expensive shafts. Carbon fiber is
the preferred shaft material of today’s competitive archers.
Matching Arrows to Your Bow
When selecting arrows, it is important to match them to your
bow. Matched arrows will fly truer and be more accurate than
those that are not matched.
To match arrows to your bow, you must know the draw
weight of your bow and your draw length. Together, these
figures will determine the spine of the arrow you need. Spine
is a measure of the stiffness of an arrow shaft relative to its
thickness, weight, and length.
The draw weight of your bow is the
amount of pull (measured in pounds) that is
required to draw (pull back) an arrow its full
length. A bow’s draw weight is marked on
its handle. (For more about draw weight, see
“Option A: Recurve Bows and Longbows”
or “Option B: Compound Bows.”)
Try to test a variety of arrows before
you buy your own. When you order arrows,
include your bow draw weight, arrow length,
and the type of arrow you need: target, field,
or hunting. Also specify the fletching and the
type of point you need. With this information,
you will be able to get a perfect match for
your bow.
Care of Arrows
Take care of your arrows. Improper care can
affect accuracy and cause injury. Look for
signs of damage before, during, and after shooting. Start with
the nock and work your way to the point. If the nock is cracked
or broken, replace it. If feathers or vanes are coming off, glue
them back in place. To reshape crushed feathers, try holding
them over steam from boiling water. The heat and moisture will
smooth the feathers and make the barbs stand up.
Check the shaft for straightness. If an arrow is bent, put
it aside and straighten it after you are done shooting. Check
wood, fiberglass, or carbon fiber arrows for cracks or splinters
in the shaft. Break a cracked or splintered arrow in half and


22 ARCHERY
Archery Equipment.
throw it away. A cracked or splintered arrow, if shot, could
explode and cause serious injury. Lightly sand and polish any
rough spots in an arrow’s finish.
Check for missing or dulled points. Missing points must be
replaced. Hone dulled points with a fine file, then clean them
with steel wool.
Store your arrows
where they will not get wet
or undergo temperature
change. Many archers have
special cases for storing their
arrows. Others keep them in
quivers hanging on a wall.
Never put anything on top
of your arrows; this could
damage the fletching and
bend the shafts.
Another way to estimate proper arrow length is to stand with both arms
extended in front of you with your fingertips touching. The distance
from your fingertips to the base of your neck will give a close estimate
of your correct arrow length.
The draw length of your arrow
can be measured several
ways. The best way to
determine correct arrow
length is to draw a
special measuring arrow
that has been marked every inch, like
a ruler. When you are at full draw, your
correct arrow length is read from the
marked arrow where it crosses the back
of your bow.
FACE
OF BOW
MEASURING ARROW
MARKED IN INCHES
SELECT AN ARROW
LENGTH THAT IS 1 INCH
BEYOND THE BACK OF
THE BOW.
1"
BACK
OF BOW
Be sure your
arrows are
long enough
for your bow.


ARCHERY 23
.Archery Equipment
Quivers
Quivers hold your arrows when you are shooting. The style
of quiver you choose will depend on the type of archery
you shoot.
• Belt quivers attach to your
belt and allow you to reach
arrows easily. Styles include
vertical, diagonal, hip,
pocket, and holster.
• Ground quivers stick in the ground.
They may have a rack to hold your
bow as well as a container to keep
your arrows upright.
• Back quivers sling over either
shoulder. One drawback to
these quivers is that you must
reach high to withdraw an
arrow, a problem if you are
trying to sneak up on game
or you are target shooting
in a forested area.
• Bow quivers attach to
the bow, giving hunters
the convenience of
carrying only one piece
of equipment through
the brush. Some field
archers use bow quivers,
but tournament archers
usually find them
too clumsy.
To make common repairs, follow the instructions for
attaching nocks, points, and feathers in the section
“Making Arrows.”
Bow quiver
Belt quiver
Back quiver
Ground quiver


24 ARCHERY
Archery Equipment.
Making an Arrow
Start with a bare shaft; attach a nock, a point, and three fletchings (and
if you want, a crest) and you have made an arrow. Most archers make
their first arrows with wooden shafts. The instructions that follow are for
making an arrow with a wood shaft and feather fletchings. If you want
to make an arrow with different materials, discuss the possibilities with
your Archery merit badge counselor.
To make a wood arrow:
Step 1—Cut the shaft to length.
The picture shows a Scout
cutting a wood arrow shaft
using a Scout knife. Refer
to the previous section on
“Matching Arrows to Your Bow”
to decide how long you should
make your arrow.
Step 2—Attach the nock and
the point.
Tapers are needed on each
end of the shaft to provide a
good surface for gluing on the
nock and the point. Cut the
tapers as shown (2a), using a
hand taper tool. The long taper
is for the point, and the short
taper is for the nock.
To make one arrow, you will need a fletching jig, an arrow shaft, a hand
taper tool, a point, a nock, three fletchings, fletching glue or cement, and
epoxy cement. Don’t forget your Scout knife.
1
2a


ARCHERY 25
.Archery Equipment
Put glue in the nock (2b)
and spread the glue by twisting
the nock onto the shorter taper
(2c). The nock can be glued
with fletching cement, but use
a more rugged glue such as
epoxy or hot glue for the point.
Put the glue on the long taper,
then twist the point onto the
shaft to spread the glue and
make a good bond.
Step 3—After the glue on the
nock has set, attach the fletch-
ings. Placing fletchings accu-
rately requires a fletching jig,
as shown in the photos.
Place a feather in the jig’s
clamp (3a) so that the rounded
part of the feather is about
3/4 inch from the back end of
the clamp.
Spread fletching glue
evenly along the edge of the
feather held in the clamp
(3b, next page).
Place the clamp in the jig.
Make sure the fletching and
the glue are in good contact
with the shaft. The jig shown
here uses a magnet to hold the
clamp in place. Other jigs use
the weight of the clamp to hold
the fletching tight alongside the
shaft. Do not hold these clamps
in place. Let gravity do the job
of holding the feather on the
shaft while the glue dries.
2b
2c
3a


26 ARCHERY
Archery Equipment.
Without an arm
guard, your
shirtsleeve or
the skin of your
lower arm will
often “grab”
the bowstring,
causing you to
shoot low.
Arm Guard
The arm guard, worn over the arm that holds the bow, protects
the forearm from the slap of the bowstring after the arrow is
released. The arm guard also provides a smooth surface for
the bowstring to strike. It usually is made of plastic or tough
cordovan leather reinforced by a steel band. Adjustable elastic
straps hold the guard snugly over the inside forearm.
When the glue has dried,
rotate the jig’s nock receiver
120 degrees until you hear a
click. Repeat the above steps
to glue the second fletching
to the shaft. To complete your
arrow, repeat the steps to
glue the third fletching to
the shaft.
Step 4—Once your arrow is
finished, you might want to
put a crest on it to identify it as yours. To add a crest, place a pattern
of colored bands around the shaft about 2 inches in front of the fletch-
ings. Put the crest close enough to the fletchings that it does not get
buried in the target.
The arm guard is the easiest accessory to select. Almost any
commercial brand is suitable. Though absolutely essential, prob-
ably no part of the beginner’s equipment is so often overlooked.
3b


ARCHERY 27
.Archery Equipment
The hunting arm guard usually is wider and longer than
guards used on field and target ranges. It has three or four
straps instead of two.
Shooting Glove, Tab, or Mechanical
Release Aids
Protect your shooting fingers with a shooting glove or tab.
Even the lightest bow will soon make untrained fingers
sensitive, eventually causing blisters. All archers should use
finger protection, no matter how tough they think their fingers
are. The most experienced and skilled archers always shoot
with a glove or tab.
Shooting Glove
The glove type of finger
protection has three
fingertips connected to
a wrist strap. The glove
should fit snugly, but
not tightly, over the
three shooting fingers.
Carefully select a glove
that fits well and is
comfortable.
Tab
The simplest and
least expensive finger
protection is the tab.
Available in various
forms, the tab generally
is a loose flap of plastic
or leather that lies over
the fingers that draw
the bowstring. As a
beginner, you may find
the tab awkward, but
with a little practice
you can become com-
fortable using one.
Without a glove
or tab, the release
of your arrow—
which is the most
crucial motion in
shooting—may
be faulty.
Many top target archers use a tab
because it gives greater control and
a smoother release.
Shooting glove
Store arm guards,
shooting gloves,
and tabs out of
the sun; if they
are made of
leather, avoid
getting them wet.
Buff the leather
when necessary.


28 ARCHERY
Archery Equipment.
Mechanical Release Aids
Mechanical release aids that replace the fingers in holding and
releasing the bowstring have grown in use in recent decades.
The three major types of mechanical releases are rope, solid
(one-piece), and moving sections.
Use extreme care with mechanical releases.
Scouting America recommends that mechanical
release aids should be used only under the strict
supervision of a qualified merit badge counselor.


ARCHERY 29
.Archery Equipment
Bow Slings
The best way to hold a bow is to hold it without wrapping your
fingers around it. However, if you shoot this way the bow will
jump out of your hand when you release the string. You will
need a bow sling to keep the bow from falling to the ground.
Different styles of bow slings can be bought or made, out of
cord or leather. The two major types are the finger sling and the
wrist sling.
Try the different styles of bow slings to see which one
works best for you and needs no adjustment after each shot.
Because the finger release is an important part of
championship form, mechanical releases are not
allowed in tournaments sanctioned by the World
Archery Federation, based in Lausanne, Switzerland.
These tournaments include the Olympics, world
championships, and U.S. national championships.
Wrist slings are
either mounted on
the bow and laid
across the wrist,
or looped around
the wrist with an
end going around
the bow and
hooked onto the
loop on the inside
of the wrist.
Wrist
sling
The finger sling attaches around the thumb and the index finger
of the bow hand. You also can make a simple finger sling using
a shoestring.





ARCHERY 31
..Option A: Recurve Bows and Longbows
If you decide to
buy a takedown
bow, make sure
the limbs fit
snugly and do
not move at the
points where
they attach to
the handle riser.
Option A: Recurve Bows
and Longbows
Early archers used simple longbows and recurve bows. The first
bows were made from a single piece of wood, and usually they
had straight limbs. Where good bow wood was scarce, people
learned to make composite bows from wood, horn, and sinew.
These bows were often recurved, much like the one illustrated
in this chapter.
You may select a single-piece bow, which does not come
apart, or a takedown bow, which breaks into three sections: a
handle riser and upper and lower limbs. Takedown bows are
easier to store and more convenient for travel than single-piece
bows. An archer who hunts and target-shoots can use the same
handle riser with two sets of limbs, rather than use two separate
bows for these pursuits.
Whatever bow you choose, the two most important factors
in selecting it are its draw weight and its length.
Draw Weight
Draw weight is the amount of force needed to pull the bow-
string back the length of the arrow. That force is measured in
pounds. For easy comparison, because arrows come in many
lengths, draw weight is always measured with the bowstring
drawn back a standard distance of 28 inches. The number of
pounds it takes to pull the bowstring back that far is the bow’s
draw weight. A bow marked 33# at 28" has a draw weight of
33 pounds. A bow’s draw weight will be marked on its handle
or lower limb.
The limb is the upper or lower part of the bow that bends when the
bowstring is drawn. A beginner archer with a takedown bow only
needs to buy new limbs—not a whole new bow—to improve gear.


32 ARCHERY
.Option A: Recurve Bows and Longbows.
Another kind of draw weight is
called the actual draw weight. This
is the amount of force you exert on
the bowstring when you are shoot-
ing. Actual draw weight may vary
from the draw weight marked on
the bow, depending on the length
of your draw. Determine your
length of draw by holding the bow
with an extended arm and drawing
the bowstring back until the index
finger is under the center of the
chin. If your draw length is 28 inches,
your actual draw weight is the
same as the draw weight marked
on your bow. If your draw length
is less than 28 inches, your actual
draw weight is less than the
weight marked.
A good draw weight to start
with is 20 or 25 pounds. This
weight will allow you to learn and
practice the skills of archery.
Archery is not a test of strength,
but of skill. If your bow is too
heavy, you will have a hard time
learning to shoot accurately. You
should be able to pull and hold
your bow at full draw 10 times for
5 to 10 seconds at a time without
shaking or getting tired.
To determine the actual draw weight of your bow, add 2 pounds for
every inch over 28 inches that you pull back your bowstring, or subtract
2 pounds for every inch under. For example: You have a bow marked
33# at 28" (33 pounds at 28 inches), and your draw length is 26 inches.
Your actual draw weight is 29 pounds: 33 – (2 inches × 2 pounds). An
adult, if shooting the same bow with a draw length of 29 inches, would
have an actual draw weight of 33 + (1 inch × 2 pounds), or 35 pounds.
Shown are all of the parts of a modern recurve
bow. Modern longbows have the same parts,
except they have no recurve and may not have
a sight window (the cutaway part of the bow
above the handle).
TIP
STRING NOTCH
UPPER LIMB
BACK FACE
SIGHT WINDOW
ARROWPLATE
ARROW REST
STRING HEIGHT
STRING
RECURVE
GRIP
LOWER LIMB
HANDLE
RISER
SECTION SERVING


ARCHERY 33
..Option A: Recurve Bows and Longbows
Bow Length
Bow length is measured along the contour of the face of the
bow (the side nearest the string) from limb tip to limb tip. The
length is marked on the bow just below the draw weight. An
example of a bow-length marking is “ATA 64 inch.” (ATA stands
for Archery Trade Association, which sets standards for bow
and string length.)
The length of the bow you choose will depend mainly on
the type of shooting you will do. Generally, target bows are
longer than those designed for hunting. Target bows typically
are 60 to 70 inches long; hunting bows are 54 to 64 inches
long. In general, the longer the bow, the smoother and more
accurate the shot; the shorter the bow, the more arrow speed
and ease of handling when hunting. A good bow length to
start with is about 64 inches.
Caring for a Recurve Bow or Longbow
Always unstring your bow when you are not using
it. This will lengthen the bow’s life and keep it
from taking on a permanent bend. Store the
unstrung bow in a cool, dry place, hanging
it vertically or horizontally on pegs. An
occasional coat of furniture wax will help
protect the finish.
Never use your bow as a walking
stick or allow it to strike objects that will
nick or scar it. Scratches can turn into
splinters and eventually result
in a broken bow. When a
bow might be exposed to
rain or possible damage,
place it in a bow case, a long
narrow sack made of soft material.
A bow is a delicate instrument. With
proper care, it will last for many years.
After you learn
the fundamentals
of good shooting
and you have
practiced enough
to strengthen your
shooting muscles,
you may choose
to go to a
heavier bow.
Recurve bow Longbow


34 ARCHERY
.Option A: Recurve Bows and Longbows.
The Bowstring and Its Care
USA Archery advises beginners to use bowstrings made of
Dacron with a serving (a wrapping of thread that protects the
bowstring where the arrow is set) made of multifilament nylon
thread. Get an expert to help you select a bowstring that is the
right length and has the right number of strands for your bow.
You can determine your bowstring’s nocking point with
a bow square. Lay the shaft of your arrow on the arrow
rest and find the point on the string that would place your
arrow perpendicular (at a 90-degree angle) to the string.
A bow square is
a T-shaped device
used to measure
nocking height
and string height.
Always use a bow
stringer when
stringing your
bow. Improper
stringing or using
step-through or
push-pull methods
can cause perma-
nent damage.


ARCHERY 35
.Option A: Recurve Bows and Longbows
Keep your
bowstring
well-waxed
with either a
commercial
bowstring wax
or a wax you
can make
yourself using
one part resin
to three
parts beeswax.
Now measure 3/8
inch up from the
bottom of the arrow
to find your correct
nocking point. Mark
this spot with serv-
ing thread, crimp-on
nock locator, or even
dental floss so you
can find the exact
location easily,
every time.
Inspect the string carefully before and after each day’s
shooting. If any of the main strands are broken, replace the
string. Check the serving and repair or replace it if it is loose
or worn. The serving protects the string’s delicate fibers from
directly contacting the arrow nock and assures longer string life.
Store the bowstring with your bow.
Mark the nocking point—
the point on the string where
the notched end of the arrow
fits—to make it easy to locate.
ARROWPLATE
NOCK
LOCATOR
STRING HEIGHT 90º
NOCKING
HEIGHT
STRING
CENTER
SERVING
ARROW REST





ARCHERY 37
..Option B: Compound Bows
Option B:
Compound Bows
The compound bow is the only fundamental improvement in
bow technology since prehistoric times. The advantage of the
compound bow is that the variation in draw weight as the bow
is drawn can be modified from the ever-increasing draw weight
variation of the recurve or longbow. This mechanical advantage
is accomplished with two cams or eccentrics and a cable that
passes over them, as shown. At full draw, compound bows
normally have a draw
weight that is less than its
maximum draw weight
at partial draw.
For example, a bow
that reaches its maximum
draw weight of 50 pounds
at three-quarter draw
might have a full draw
weight of only 25 pounds.
Some compound bows
have a full draw weight
of as little as 20 percent
of the maximum. That is,
they have an 80 percent
let-off.
Parts of a modern compound bow
IDLER WHEEL
AXLE
BUSS
CABLE
UPPER LIMB
LIMB BOLT
RISER
GRIP
LIMB BOLT
LOWER LIMB
SHOOTING
STRING
CAM
CABLE GUARD
CABLE GUARD SLIDE
WINDOW
ARROW REST SERVING
NOCKING
POINT


38 ARCHERY
.Option B: Compound Bows.
Another characteristic of a compound bow is that when
the bowstring is drawn to the bow’s preset draw length, the
bow cannot be drawn any further. This means your bow must
be adjusted to your draw length. Most compound bows have
a limited range of draw-length adjustments. A knowledgeable
adult should make the adjustments.
You may select a single-cam bow or a two-cam bow. The
single-cam bow will have an idler wheel at one end of the bow
and the cam at the other end, as shown. A two-cam bow will
have cams at both ends. Both types perform well. Your choice
will depend on your preferences. Try both types before you
decide which kind you want.
Whatever bow you choose, the two most important factors
in selecting it are its draw weights (both maximum and at full
draw) and its length.
Draw Weights
Draw weight is the amount of force needed to pull back the
bowstring. That force is measured in pounds. A compound
bow has two draw weights—the maximum draw weight and
the weight at full draw. Most good compound bows have
adjustable draw weights.
The maximum draw weight, the factory-set draw length,
and the ATA bowstring length usually are marked on the face
of the lower limb. (ATA stands for Archery Trade Association,
which sets standards for bow weight and bow and string
length.) For example, a compound bow might be marked
50# at 29", and 28" bowstring. That bow can be adjusted
to have a maximum draw weight of 50 pounds; it has a draw
length of 29 inches as it comes from the factory box; and it
requires a 28-inch bowstring. The maximum draw weight and
draw length could be adjusted to fit your needs, but the string
length will always be 28 inches.
Tip: To avoid dryfiring, it is best to always have an
arrow on the string when shooting a bow. Dryfiring,
or shooting a bow without an arrow, can seriously
damage a bow and possibly injure the archer.
H. Wilbur Allen
patented the
compound bow
in 1969.


ARCHERY 39
..Option B: Compound Bows
A good maximum draw weight to start with is about
35 pounds with a full draw weight of about 20 pounds. This
weight will allow you to learn and practice the skills of archery.
Archery is not a test of strength, but of skill. If your bow is
too hard to pull, you will have a hard time learning to shoot
accurately. You should be able to pull and hold your bow at
full draw 10 times for 5 to 10 seconds at a time without shak-
ing or getting tired. After you learn the fundamentals of good
shooting and you have strengthened your shooting muscles
with practice, you may choose to increase the maximum and
full draw weights of your bow.
Bow Length
The length of a compound bow is measured from the axle of
the cam or idler on the upper limb to the axle of the cam on
the lower limb. An example of a bow length is “ATA 34 inch.”


40 ARCHERY
.Option B: Compound Bows.
The length of the bow you choose will depend mainly
on the type of shooting you will do. Generally, target bows
are longer than those designed for hunting. Compound bows
for target-shooting are typically 38 to 44 inches long; hunting
bows are 32 to 38 inches long. In general, the longer the bow,
the smoother and more accurate the shot; the shorter the bow,
the more arrow speed and ease of handling when hunting. For
a compound bow, a good length to start with is 36 or 38 inches.
Caring for a Compound Bow
A compound bow requires constant care. Because it is a highly
technical piece of machinery, any adjustments must be done
by a bowyer trained to work on compound bows.
The user’s manual included with the bow will give you
detailed care instructions. The manual will tell you whether
and when to lubricate the axles, whether and when to replace
the cables and string, and how to store your bow. Follow the
manufacturer’s instructions carefully and your bow will give
good service over many years.
The Bowstring and Cables and Their Care
Determine your bowstring’s nocking point—the spot where you
fit the notched end of the arrow—using a bow square. Lay the
shaft of your arrow on the arrow rest and find the point on the
string that would place your arrow perpendicular (at a 90-degree
angle) to the string. Now measure 3/8 inch up from the bottom of
the arrow to find your correct nocking point. Mark this spot with
serving thread or crimp-on nock locator, or even dental floss so
you can easily find the exact location every time.
Keep your bowstring and nonmetal cables well-waxed with
a commercial silicon-based bowstring wax. Inspect the string
carefully before and after each day’s shooting. If the string is
frayed, check the string carefully for broken strands.
A bow square is
a T-shaped device
used to measure
nocking height
and string height.
Bows usually are stored hanging by the riser in a hori-
zontal position in a cool, dry place. Do not subject a
bow to excessive heat. The high temperatures reached
in a truck or car left in the sun can damage any bow.


ARCHERY 41
.Option B: Compound Bows
If any of the strands are broken, replace the string. If no
strands are broken, give the string a good coat of wax to
help prevent further fraying.
Check the serving and repair or replace it if it is loose or
worn. The serving protects the delicate fibers of the strands
from directly contacting the arrow nock and assures longer
string life.
A bowyer is
someone who
makes or
services bows.
Replacing the string and most other repairs and
adjustments made on a compound bow require that
the tension on the string and cables be relieved.
A special compound bow press holds the bow and
allows the limbs to flex without pulling the string.
This is the only safe and convenient method that will
not damage the bow. Only a knowledgeable, profes-
sional bowyer should repair and adjust the bow.





ARCHERY 43
.Shooting a Bow and Arrow
Shooting a Bow
and Arrow
A bow is not ready for action until it is
braced (strung). If you are shooting a
recurve bow or longbow, use a stringer
to string your bow each time. The photos
show the proper ways to string straight
and recurve bows. Improper stringing can
damage or twist a bow’s limbs.
When you string your bow, also check
the string height (fistmele). The string height
is the distance between the handle and the
string when the bow is strung. The manu-
facturer sets the correct string height. On
most modern bows, it is from 7 to 9 inches
(18 to 23 centimeters). If your bowstring is
too short, the string height will be too great
and the bow limbs will be under too much
strain. If the bowstring is too long, the
string height will be too little and the string
may give you a lot of arm and wrist slap.
String stringer
Rope stringer


44 ARCHERY
Shooting a Bow and Arrow.
If you are shooting a com-
pound bow, check that the cables
are in good condition and are
riding properly in the grooves of
the cams and wheels. Also check
that the tiller for both upper and
lower limbs is proper. Tiller is the
distance to the bowstring from
the joint where the limb meets
the riser. If your bow does not have
the proper tiller, let an experienced
adult archer fix it.
Steps of Shooting
Shooting a bow has 11 basic steps:
stance, nock, hook and grip,
posture/alignment, raise bow, draw,
anchor, transfer to hold, aim, release/
follow-through, and feedback.
Step 1: Stance
Your stance is the position you assume when
you shoot. For target shooting, position
your body parallel to the flight of the
arrow, with your left side toward the target.
Stand comfortably, keeping your feet about
shoulders’ width apart. Touch your toes to
an imaginary line leading to the center of the
target. If you were to lay an arrow on the
ground against your toes, it would point to
the target. Stand up straight and keep your
weight evenly balanced on both feet. Relax
your shoulders. Look directly at the target.
Before you begin
shooting, sight
down your bow’s
limbs. The string
should go straight
down the middle
of both limbs. If
your bow has a
twisted limb, let
an experienced
adult archer fix it.
The techniques described here
are for right-handed archers.
Left-handed archers should reverse
body positions.
Stance


ARCHERY 45
.Shooting a Bow and Arrow
Step 2: Nock
Nocking the arrow means
placing the arrow on the
string and the bow. With
your right hand, lay the
shaft of the arrow on
the arrow rest. Nock the
arrow (fit its notched end
onto the string) at the
proper nocking point,
just below and touching
the nock locator. Be sure
the index (odd-colored)
feather is facing away
from the bow.
Step 3: Hook and Grip
Keep your shoulders level. Set your left hand (if you are right-
handed) comfortably in the handle of the bow. Lightly hold
the bow with its weight against the base of your thumb. Center
the bow’s pressure in the Y formed by your thumb and index
finger. Avoid an overly tight grip on the bow handle because a
tight grip chokes
the bow’s natural
action.
Place three
fingers of your
right hand on the
bowstring, index
finger above the
arrow and middle
two fingers below
it. The string
should rest in
the first joint of
all three fingers.
Your right hand
is now forming
a hook on the
bowstring.
Hook and grip
Nock


46 ARCHERY
Shooting a Bow and Arrow.
Step 4:
Posture/Alignment (Set)
Keeping your shoulder down,
raise your left arm and the bow
until the arrow is pointed directly
at the target. At the same time,
rotate your left elbow downward
so it will not be in the way of
the string when you release. Your
left hand lightly holds the handle
of the bow. The elbow of your
drawing arm should be near the
level of your nose.
Step 5:
Raise Bow (Set-Up)
Lift both arms up from the
ground and keep the bow arm
extended. Stop when the bow
hand is at shoulder height.
Step 6: Draw
Extending your left arm
fully and keeping your
left shoulder down, begin
to draw the bowstring
with your right hand.
Keep your right hand
and elbow at shoulder
level. Your right forearm
becomes a straight-line
extension of the arrow.
Use your strong back
muscles to draw the bow,
concentrating on smooth-
ly and steadily moving
your elbow straight back.
Be sure to draw your bow
the same length each
time.
Draw
Posture/
Alignment


ARCHERY 47
.Shooting a Bow and Arrow
Step 7: Anchor
The anchor point is where the archer’s hand and bowstring
touch the face at full draw. It is essential that you use the same
anchor point for every shot. The anchor point serves as the rear
sight.
To anchor, settle the index finger of the draw hand in
the corner of the mouth. Keep the draw hand relaxed and up
against the face.
Step 8: Transfer to Hold
At full draw, transfer the weight of the bow from your arms and
shoulders to your back. Bring your elbow directly behind the
arrow. Use your back muscles to help hold this position.
A sloppy anchor
is the same as a
loose sight.
Side-of-the-face
anchor
Under-the-chin anchor


48 ARCHERY
Shooting a Bow and Arrow.
Step 9: Aim
Two basic methods are used for aiming a bow: bow sight and
point of aim. The bow-sight method is more accurate and easier
to learn.
BOW SIGHT
Bow sights of all kinds are available. Some are simple pins, while
others are complex sights for advanced target competition. All
sights work the same way. Their only difference is that some
are more easily adjustable for different distances.
To start, try a simple pin or target-type sight. You can make
your own. Place a strip of foam tape on the back of your bow
above the handle. Then put a round-headed pin (the kind with
a glass or enamel bead head) in the tape so that the head is
visible on the arrow side of the bow.
To establish a sight for 10 yards, put the pin in the tape
about 5 inches above the handle, with the pinhead sticking out
to the left of the bow about 1/4 inch. Choose a small (1-inch)
aiming spot on your target, 10 yards away. With the arrow
fully drawn and anchored, raise or lower the bow so that the
pinhead is in line with the right eye and the aiming spot, and
release the arrow. Shoot three to six arrows in the same way
and see where they group. If all arrows hit the aiming spot, you
have established the 10-yard sight. If the arrows group a little
high, move the pin up a bit. Adjust the sight until the arrows
consistently hit at or near the spot. Mark the 10-yard sight on
the strip of tape.
Whatever method of aiming you use, be sure to hold
until you are sure of a good shot. Snap shooting—
releasing too quickly—does not allow you to aim
properly and can be difficult to overcome later if
it becomes a habit now. Take your time, aim well,
then shoot.
Homemade
bow sight


ARCHERY 49
.Shooting a Bow and Arrow
After you have established
the 10-yard sight, stand 20
yards from your target and
try to locate the 20-yard sight.
To start, move the pin down
about 1/8 inch below the
10-yard sight and try it. You
should be close. For the
30-yard sight, move the pin
about 1/4 inch below the
20-yard sight. The 40-yard
sight will then be nearly 1/2
inch below the 30-yard sight.
To shoot well with a bow
sight, you must learn to come
to full draw and hold the sight
pin dead-center on the target.
Make sure your anchor is
solid. Once at full draw, look
past the string and you will see the sight pin and the target.
One or the other will be out of focus. It does not matter which
one is in focus; concentrate on the one with which you feel
most comfortable. When the arrow is fully drawn and anchored,
and the sight is steady on the bull’s-eye, release the arrow.
(See “Release” later in this chapter.)
At full draw, the archer looks over the tip of the arrow at a
marker in front of the target. In the illustration, the point of
aim is too far from the archer; the arrow misses the target
completely. By moving the marker and changing the point of
aim, the archer can arrive at an accurate trajectory.
POINT OF AIM TRAJECTORYLINE OF SIGHT
Some archers
use a strip of tape
with distances
marked on it. By
trial and error, as
described in this
section, they have
figured out where
to move their
sight pin in that
tape to shoot a
specific distance.
Homemade sights
work as well as
store-bought
sights; the
adjustments
just are not
as precise.


50 ARCHERY
Shooting a Bow and Arrow.
POINT OF AIM
The point-of-aim method requires the archer to rely on instinct.
The archer looks down the arrow shaft to a spot on the ground
in front of the target called the point of aim. Usually, the point
of aim is a rock, a piece of paper, light-colored plastic, or other
marker. In effect, the archer uses the point of the arrow as a
sight. If the arrow misses the target, the point-of-aim marker
is moved, forward or back, until the arrow strikes the target
center. (See the illustration.)
Step 10: Release and Follow-Through
Releasing is simply a matter of relaxing the fingers that hold the
string while you maintain the tension in your back. When your
draw fingers relax, the string will escape, and the arrow will be
on its way.
As you release, maintain your good shooting form and
keep your eyes on the target. Try to move as little as possible.
Some people wait until the arrow hits the target before they
relax. Movement during the follow-through can cause an oth-
erwise good shot to miss the mark. In a good follow-through,
your right hand will be at the back of your neck, and your bow
arm will still be lined up perfectly with the target.
Cast is the
distance a bow
can shoot an
arrow. If you fish,
you know that a
throw of a fishing
line or net is also
a cast.
Thanks to modern technology and an open philosophy
that archery is a sport for just about anyone, thousands
of people with disabilities are able to participate in
archery both competitively and for fun. Archery equip-
ment manufacturers have developed gear especially for
archers with special needs. A number of organizations
and facilities actively support and promote archery for
people with disabilities. In addition, to help equalize
competition among archers with disabilities, multiple
categories of competition have been developed. Serious
archers are able to compete at the elite level, as well.
In fact, since 1996, the World Archery Federation (which
governs international rounds and coordinates archery in
the Olympics) has actively pursued the establishment of
competition rules for archers with special needs.


ARCHERY 51
.Shooting a Bow and Arrow
Step 11: Feedback
Evaluate your shot process to see how you may improve for the
next shot.
Before you
release, run a
quick mental
check of all the
other steps. If
everything is
right, release, and
you will see your
arrow strike
the bull’s-eye.
Release and follow-through





ARCHERY 53
.Archery Games and Tournaments
Archery tourna-
ments can last
from a few hours
to several days.
Archery Games
and Tournaments
An archery tournament has one or more rounds. In each
round, archers shoot a series of arrows at specified distances
and target faces.
Competitive archery has three styles: target, field,
and 3-D.
Target archery is shot on a large, open field with multi-
colored target faces. This is the type of archery shot in
the Olympics and Paralympics.
Field archery is shot on a roving course. Archers shoot
at different angles and distances, moving through
woods and fields as if in search of wild game.
3-D archery also is shot on a roving course, but the tar-
gets are molded foam replicas of game animals. Field
and 3-D archery are good practice for bow hunting.


54 ARCHERY
Archery Games and Tournaments.
Field Archery and Target Archery
Field archery is set up on a course or roving range similar to
the field archery plan shown later in this chapter. Different
target faces and shooting distances are used for 14 targets.
Stakes driven into the ground mark the exact shooting spot
for each target. The archer stands behind the stakes to shoot.
Outdoor target archery is set up in an open field, using
122-centimeter (48-inch) target faces. In most cases, the target
position is set and the shooting line is moved when different
distances are shot. The longest distances are shot first.
Indoor target archery is shot in a building, using 60- or
40-centimeter targets at a distance of 18 meters (20 yards).
Target archers straddle the firing line, with one foot in front
of and one foot behind the line.
These four organizations govern archery tournaments. See the
resources section for ways to contact them.
USA Archery—Governs American target archery rounds and approves
international target and field rounds for Americans in Olympic and
World Archery competitions. It is responsible for selecting and train-
ing men’s and women’s teams to represent the U.S. in the Olympic,
Paralympic, and other international competitions.
National Field Archery Association—Governs American field archery
rounds for amateur and professional competition. The NFAA is a
member of the International Field Archery Association.
World Archery Federation—Based in Switzerland, governs international
rounds and coordinates archery in the Olympics and Paralympics.
International Bowhunting Organization—Governs 3-D rounds.


ARCHERY 55
.Archery Games and Tournaments
Field Archery Rounds
The NFAA’s field, hunter, and animal rounds; Scouting
America’s Scout field round; and the International Bowhunting
Organization (IBO) 3-D round all are field rounds.
FIELD ROUND (NFAA)
The field round, originally developed
to give archers a way to practice bow
hunting, has become as much a game as
it is hunting practice. The course is set up
in the woods, using 14 targets that vary in
size from 20 centimeters (8 inches) to
65 centimeters (26 inches).
Archers shoot four arrows at each
target. For 11 of the targets, the four
arrows are shot from the same position,
but distances vary for different targets.
Distances and target sizes are listed in
the chart, “Target Sizes and Shooting
Distances for the NFAA and Scout Field
Rounds.” NFAA field target
START
2
1
3
4 5
6
7 8
9
10
FINISH
Field archery plan


56 ARCHERY
Archery Games and Tournaments.
Shooting positions are marked with white stakes. They do
not follow in any special order and may be arranged as best
suits the terrain.
The targets have five scoring rings. The black center or
spot is one-fifth the outer diameter of the target and has an
inner circle half the diameter of the spot. The inner circle is
used in breaking tied scores. Standard field-round scoring
is 5 points for the black bull’s-eye or spot, 4 points for the
two white areas, and 3 points for the two outer black areas.
Championship scoring uses all five rings with scores from
5 to 1.
SCOUT FIELD ROUND (SCOUTING AMERICA)
The Scout field round is an adaptation of the NFAA field round
for Boy Scout camps. The targets and scoring are the same as
for the NFAA field round. However, the distances to be shot
are different so that less space is required.
HUNTER’S ROUND (NFAA)
The hunter’s round is designed to give the archer practice in
concentrating on the target area. The target is all black, with
lighter lines marking the five scoring areas. Shooting distances
are slightly less than in the field round, but the same course is
used, with red stakes marking the shooting positions. Archers
must change positions for each shot in a hunter’s round.
Scoring is the same as in a field
round: 5 points for the bull’s-eye or
spot, 4 points for the next two rings,
and 3 points for the two outer rings.
ANIMAL ROUND (NFAA)
The animal round, designed for bow
hunting practice, is laid out on the
same course as the field and hunter’s
rounds. However, animal target faces
are used instead of circular black-and-white targets. Targets
have two scoring areas, the “vital” and “nonvital” areas.
Three arrows may be used for each target. The first arrow to
hit scores; any remaining arrows are not scored. Thus, if the
first arrow hits the target, the second and third arrows are not
scored. Scoring is shown in the chart.


ARCHERY 57
.Archery Games and Tournaments
THREE-DIMENSIONAL (3-D) ROUND (IBO)
The 3-D round also is designed for bow hunting practice. It is
laid out on the same type of 14-target course used for the field
and hunter’s rounds. However, the targets are three-dimensional
replicas of animals, and distances are unmarked. Targets have
three scoring areas: the circle within the vital area (10 points),
the vital area (8 points), and the rest of the body (5 points).
Only one arrow may be shot at each target.
Target Archery Rounds
Target archery rounds may be shot indoors or outdoors and are
typically shot at a distance of 18 meters indoors and between 30
and 70 meters outdoors. Outdoor distances are assigned based on
age category and bow type (recurve, compound or barebow).
For more information about target archery scoring visit
usarchery.org.
Target Sizes and Shooting Distances for the NFAA and Scout Field Rounds
NFAA Field Round Scout Field Round
Distances Target Size Distance Target Size
Yards Centimeters Yards Centimeters
80-70-60-50 65 7 20
65 65 11 35
60 65 15 50
55 65 20 65
50 50 12 35
45-40-35-30 50 16 50
45 50 21 65
40 50 13 35
35-35-35-35 50 17 50
30 35 22 65
25 35 14 35
20 35 18 50
15 35 23 65
35-30-25-20 ft. 20 19 50
Animal Round Scoring
HITS VITAL AREA NONVITAL AREA
First arrow 20 points 18 points
Second arrow 16 points 14 points
Third arrow 12 points 10 points


58 ARCHERY
Archery Games and Tournaments.
900 ROUND (USA ARCHERY)
This is an outdoor target round. The course is set up in an open
area. A 122-centimeter (48-inch) five-color target with 10-ring
scoring is used.
Scoring, from the center out, is 10-9-8-7-6-5-4-3-2-1. The
distances and numbers of arrows shot (for a total possible or
perfect score of 900) are
30 arrows at 60 meters
30 arrows at 50 meters
30 arrows at 40 meters
Shooting is in ends of six arrows. This means the score is
checked and arrows are recovered after each six arrows have
been shot.
WORLD ARCHERY INDOOR ROUND I
(WORLD ARCHERY FEDERATION)
A 40-centimeter five-color target face is
used, with 10-ring scoring: 10-9-8-7-
6-5-4-3-2-1. Thirty arrows are shot
at 18 meters. Shooting is in ends of
three arrows.
WORLD ARCHERY INDOOR ROUND II (WORLD
ARCHERY FEDERATION)
This is similar to World Archery Round I, with 30 arrows
shot. But, the distance is 25 meters and the target has a
60-centimeter face. Shooting is in ends of three arrows.
NFAA INDOOR 300 ROUND
The 300 round consists of 60 arrows shot in 12 five-arrow ends.
(The score is marked and arrows are recovered after each five
arrows have been shot.) The round is shot at a 40-centimeter
blue NFAA target from 20 yards. Scoring, from the center out,
is 5, 4, 3, 2, and 1, with a total possible score of 300.
JUNIOR OLYMPIC ARCHERY DEVELOPMENT
(USA ARCHERY)
USA Archery's youth archery training program, Junior
Olympic Archery Development (JOAD), classifies young
archers by their scores. The ratings are Yeoman, Junior
Bowman, Bowman, Junior Archer, Archer, Master Archer,
Expert Archer, and Olympian.


ARCHERY 59
.Archery Games and Tournaments
Outdoor shooting distances are 15, 20, 25, 30, 40, 60, and
70 meters. Outdoor qualifying rounds are shot in ends of six
arrows at five-color 122-centimeter (48-inch) targets.
The indoor distance is 18 meters (20 yards). Qualifying
rounds are shot in ends of six arrows at 60-centimeter
(24-inch) faces. Progressively higher scores are required
for advancement.
All JOAD
qualifying rounds
use the five-color
target with
10-ring scoring.
Scoring USA Archery
and NFAA Targets
Here are two typical archery scorecards.
The number of hits and the score for each end
are recorded. The total number of hits and total score
are determined by adding the results of each end.


60 ARCHERY
Archery Games and Tournaments.
National, International, Olympic and
Paralympic Games Events
After you have earned the Archery merit badge, you might want
to try your skills in a tournament. Local clubs put on tourna-
ments for both target and field shooters.
You might even set your sights on national, interna-
tional, or Olympic archery tournaments, where the number of
arrows and the distance from the target vary by the nature of
the event. For example, indoor archery competitions require
36 arrow rounds and outdoor competitions require 72 arrow
rounds. At indoor competitions, arrows are usually shot from a
distance of 18 meters at a 40-centimeter (16-inch) target face.
Arrows at outdoor competitions may be shot from 70 meters
away at a 40-centimeter triple target.
The target faces have five color zones—gold, red, blue,
black, and white. A scoring line divides each zone into two
areas, making a total of 10 scoring zones. These zones are
worth from 10 points (for the center) to 1 point (the outer ring).
The number of competitors varies according to the type,
or “discipline,” of the archery competition. For example, at the
World Archery Championships, 104 athletes begin the competi-
tion but, for the finals, only the top eight athletes compete.
Olympic and world
archery titles are
governed by the
World Archery
Federation. The
federation is
responsible for
setting the rules
and regulations
for international
archery events.
Barebow vs. Freestyle
Archers shooting barebow style may not use sights or
other shooting aids. No mechanical release devices are
allowed; only fingers, tabs, or gloves.
Archers shooting freestyle may use approved
shooting aids. In target archery, freestyle permits
stabilizers and pin sights but does not allow release
aids or optical sights. In field archery, freestyle allows
stabilizers, release aids, and optical sights.





62 ARCHERY
Archery Terms.
Archery Terms
anchor point. The point on an archer’s
face that the index finger or drawing
hand touches during holding and aiming.
arm guard. A piece of leather or other
material worn on the arm that holds the
bow to protect the forearm from being
slapped by the bowstring.
arrowplate. Material glued to the side of
the bow where the arrow contacts it. The
plate protects the bow from the friction
of the arrow. Some modern bows have
adjustable arrowplates to help tune the
bow precisely.
arrow rest. A small protrusion on
the bow where the arrow rests during
the draw.
axle. The shaft around which a cam or
idler wheel of a compound bow rotates.
back. The outer side of the bow,
farthest away from the string.
barbs. The two sharp points of an arrow-
head that project backward.
bow arm. The arm that holds the bow
while shooting.
bow sight. A sighting device attached to
a bow.
bowstring wax. A silicon or beeswax-
based material used to lubricate bow-
strings and to keep them from fraying.
bow weight. See draw weight.
brace. To string a bow.
broadhead. A hunting point with two or
more cutting edges.
buss cable. The cable on a compound
bow that goes around the cams and
wheels. Cables can be made of stainless
steel or a special bowmaker’s fiber.
butt. Any material designed to stop
arrows. A target face is pinned on the butt.
cable guard. A steel rod mounted to a
compound bow riser to keep the buss
cable from interfering with the arrow.
cable guard slide. A plastic slide that
holds the buss cable onto the cable
guard. It slides on the cable guard to
allow the buss cable to move away
from the riser as the bow is drawn.
cam. The wheel-like device at the end
of a compound bow limb that causes the
draw weight to peak and then fall off as
full draw is achieved.
cast. The distance a bow can shoot
an arrow.
creep. To let the arrow move forward
after reaching full draw, but before
release. Creep is caused by a loss of
back tension.
crest. Bands of color decoration on an
arrow, used for identification.
crossbow. A bow designed to be shot
similarly to a gun, with a groove or
barrel that directs the arrow and a
trigger that releases the string.
draw. The act of pulling back
the bowstring.
draw length. The length of your full
draw; the distance at which the arrow
is drawn back before it is released.


ARCHERY 63
.Archery Terms
draw weight. The amount of pull, meas-
ured in pounds, needed to draw an arrow
back to an archer’s full draw length. For
easy comparison of recurve bows and
longbows, draw weight is always mea-
sured with the bowstring drawn back a
standard distance of 28 inches. The draw
weight of a compound bow is the pounds
of pull needed to hold the bow at the
draw length at which the bow is set.
Also see maximum draw weight.
drawing arm. The arm that draws
the bowstring.
face. The scoring surface on a target. The
face is usually made of paper, but other
materials such as thin plastics and plasti-
cized paper are in common use. Also, the
side of the bow nearest the string.
finger sling. A strap attached to the
thumb and index finger of the bow hand
and used to keep the bow from falling
after an arrow’s release.
fistmele. The traditional term for string
height. Fistmele was measured by
placing the fist on the bow handle and
raising the thumb toward the string.
This method of measurement is not
applicable to most modern bows.
fletch. To put feathers or plastic vanes
on the arrow near its nock.
fletcher. One who puts feathers or vanes
on an arrow. Also a term for the jig used
to place feathers on the arrow when
cementing them to the shaft.
flight arrow. A light arrow used in
shooting for distance.
flight bow. A bow designed for maximum
cast with little consideration for accuracy.
flu-flu. An arrow used to shoot aerial disc
targets or hunting birds. It has very large
feathers that slow it rapidly after the first
30 yards and cause it to drop quickly.
glove. Three leather fingers held with
a wrist strap on the first three fingers of
the release hand. The glove protects the
archer’s fingers.
handle. The rigid center portion of the
bow that is held during shooting.
head. The point or tip of the arrow.
hit. To strike the target for a score.
holding. Keeping an arrow at full draw
while aiming.
index feather. The feather that is
perpendicular to the bow during the
draw; usually the odd-colored feather.
instinctive shooting. Shooting without
the aid of a sighting device or a point
of aim.
kisser button (kisser). A marker placed
on the bowstring so it touches the
archer’s lips when the archer is at full
draw. The kisser helps establish a better
anchor point.
let down. To slowly release tension from
full draw without releasing the arrow.
limb bolt. The bolt used to attach the
limbs to the riser.
limb socket. A section at the end of a
riser that is made to hold the limbs in
place. Limb sockets are used on takedown
recurve bows and compound bows.
longbow. A straight bow that has
only one curve when strung.
maximum draw weight. The peak draw
weight of a compound bow. Maximum
draw weight usually is reached at about
75 percent of full draw.
nocking point. The point on the bow-
string where the notched end of the
arrow (the nock) is fitted. The nocking
point is often marked by extra serving
or nock locators.
nock locator. An attachment to the
center serving of a bowstring used to
mark the nocking point. The nock
locator may be a metal crimp-on, a
piece of plastic that shrinks to fit, or
an additional serving.
overbowed. Equipped with too strong
a bow.


64 ARCHERY
Archery Terms.
overdraw. To draw an arrow so far that
the point passes the face of the bow.
perfect end. In target archery, six arrows
shot consecutively into the gold zone.
point of aim. A method of aiming in
which the archer sights down the arrow
shaft at a marker, usually an object
on the ground, to try to hit the target.
Also, the object used as the marker.
range. Distance to be shot; or a
shooting ground, indoors or out.
riser. The handle part of a compound bow.
round. A series of arrows shot at
specified target faces at set distances.
roving. Shooting at random objects
at unknown distances.
serving. A wrapping of thread around
the bowstring to protect it where the
arrow is nocked and where the loops
fit in the bow’s string grooves.
shooting line. A line at a specified
distance from the target. In field archery,
the shooter stands behind the shooting
line; in target archery, the shooter
straddles the line.
sight pin. An indicator an archer puts
on the bow to use as an aid in aiming.
sight window. The cutaway section
of the bow above its handle.
spine. The stiffness of an arrow shaft
relative to its thickness, weight,
and length.
stabilizer. A weighted rod screwed into
the bow to help steady it and reduce
undesirable twisting of the bow
and bowstring.
string fingers. The three fingers used
to draw the bowstring.
string grooves. The two ends of the
bow where the bowstring is fitted. Also
known as string nocks or string notches.
string height. The distance between
the bow’s handle and bowstring when
the bow is strung. String height is set
by the manufacturer and usually is from
7 to 9 inches.
strung bow. A bow that is ready for
shooting; also called a braced bow.
tab. A flat piece of leather or plastic
worn on the drawing hand to protect
the fingers when drawing the string
and to ensure a smooth release.
tackle. Any or all of an
archer’s equipment.
tassel. A large piece of yarn worn on
the archer’s belt and used to wipe
arrows clean.
tiller. The distance to the bowstring
from the joint of the limb and riser of
a compound bow. A well-tuned bow
will have the same tiller for both upper
and lower limbs.
torque. An undesirable twisting of the
bow or bowstring on release.
toxophilite. An archer or one who is
interested in all aspects of archery,
including its history.
trajectory. The path of the arrow in flight.
vanes. The feathers or plastic substitutes
that act as rudders in steering the arrow.
wand. A slat 2 inches wide and 6 feet
high, shot at from a distance of 100 yards.
The wand shoot is a holdover from
medieval competitions.
weight of bow. See draw weight.
wheel. A round cam. The wheel may be
an eccentric with its axle off-center or an
idler wheel with the axle in the center.
wrist sling. A strap attached to the bow
and the wrist of the archer’s bow hand,
used to keep the bow from falling after
an arrow’s release.





66 ARCHERY
Archery Resources.
Archery Resources
Scouting Literature
Archery, Rifle Shooting, and Shotgun
Shooting merit badge pamphlets; Guide
to Safe Scouting; Scouting America
National Range and Target Activities
Manual.
Books and Videos
Adams, John. Archery (Know the
Sport). Stackpole Books, 1996.
Boga, Steven. Archery (Backyard
Games). Stackpole Books, 1997.
Camera, Anthony. Shooting the
Stickbow, 3rd ed. Virtualbookworm.
com Publishing, 2020.
Fadala, Sam. Traditional Archery, 2nd
ed. Stackpole Books, 2011.
Habeishi, Beth and Stephanie Mallory.
Basic Illustrated Archery, Falcon
Guides, 2008.
Hamlett-Wood, Michael. Field
Archery: A Complete Guide.
Robert Hale Ltd., 2002.
Haywood, Kathleen M., and Catherine
F. Lewis. Archery: Steps to Success,
5th ed. Human Kinetics, 2024.
Johnson, Teresa. Archery
Fundamentals, 2nd ed. Human
Kinetics, 2014.
Sapp, Richard. Archer’s Digest. 7th ed.
Krause Publications, 2003.
United States Olympic Committee. A
Basic Guide to Archery. Griffin, 1997.
USA Archery. Archery. Human
Kinetics, 2012.
Wallentine, Douglas. Making Indian
Bows and Arrows, The Old Way.
Eagle’s View, 1988.
Wise, Larry. Bow and Arrow: The
Comprehensive Guide to Equipment,
Technique, and Competition.
Stackpole Books, 1992.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ARCHERY 67
.Archery Resources
Organizations and Websites
International Bowhunting
Organization
Telephone: 440-967-2137
iboarchery.com
National Field Archery Association
Telephone: 605-260-9279
nfaausa.com
USA Archery
210 USA Cycling Point, Suite 130
Colorado Springs, CO 80919
Telephone: 719-866-4576
usarchery.org
World Archery Federation
Maison du Sport International
Avenue de Rhodanie 54
1007 Lausanne
Switzerland
worldarchery.sport
Acknowledgments
Scouting America greatly appreciates
the contributions of the late Robert W.
Goodrich, Ph.D., to the Archery merit
badge pamphlet.
Thanks to John Goodrich, D.
Timothy Scronce, and Arthur Hall for
their contribution to this pamphlet.
Thanks to Jack Pedersen and Craig
Pedersen for the many hours they spent
assisting with photography. Thanks
to Mary Emmons of USA Archery for
her generous contribution of time
and content. Thanks also to the City
of Richardson (Texas) and its staff at
Breckinridge Park for allowing Scouting
America to use their first-rate archery
facilities during a photo shoot.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Robert W. Goodrich, courtesy—page 41
Jesse Scofield, courtesy—pages 10 and
42
USA Archery, courtesy—pages 45, 46,
and 51 (female archer)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 11
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—illustrations on
pages 14, 32, 35, 37, 49, and 55


Find more merit
badge ideas in
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer.
Special Scout Rate!