AUTOMOTIVE
MAINTENANCE
STEM-Based


AUTOMOTIVE
MAINTENANCE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Automotive-Maintenance
or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
You will need access to a car or truck and its owner’s
manual to meet some requirements for this merit
badge. If you do not have your own vehicle, you should
work with your counselor or other trusted adult to
obtain access to a vehicle and the owner’s manual for
that vehicle.
35861
ISBN 978-0-8395-3241-5
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing FPO


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 3


4 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 5


6 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 7
Contents
That Marvelous Driving Machine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Maintenance, Registration, and Inspection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Vehicle Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Advanced Driver Assistance Systems (ADAS) . . . . . . . . . . . . 24
The Engine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 26
The Drive Train . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 34
Wheels and Tires. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
The Braking System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
The Air Intake and Fuel Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
The Lubrication System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
The Cooling System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62
The Ignition and Electrical Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 68
The Computer and Emission Control Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
The Dashboard . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 84
Buying a Car . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 90
Careers in Automotive Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 96
Automotive Maintenance Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98





AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 9
.That Marvelous Driving Machine
That Marvelous
Driving Machine
On June 4, 1896, Henry Ford took a short drive around his
Detroit neighborhood on his experimental quadricycle. This
vehicle was little more than a frame, a seat, a small engine, a
steering bar, and four bicycle wheels. With its 4-horsepower
engine, the quadricycle could reach a top speed of 20 miles per
hour. By comparison, even the most basic cars today have
100-horsepower engines and can easily reach speeds of 100
miles per hour.
Automobile Systems
Modern automobiles are complex machines. They are assembled
from more than 15,000 parts, with more than 1,500 synchronized
to move together. Learning how they work may appear impossi-
ble. In fact, just the opposite is true. The trick is to divide car
operation into several systems. We will explain and describe
each system individually, how these systems relate to each other,
and the total operation of the car. Let’s begin with the engine.
In technical terms,
1 horsepower
equals the power
a horse would
use to move 550
pounds of cargo a
distance of 1 foot
in 1 second. That’s
745.7 watts of
power.


10 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
That Marvelous Driving Machine.
By 1909, these inventors had been so successful that Scientific
American magazine said, “The automobile has practically reached
the limit of its development [because] during the past year no
improvements of a radical nature have been introduced.”
Since then, of course, many radical improvements have been
introduced, including automatic transmissions, cruise control,
turn signals, seat belts, in-dash radios, onboard navigation
systems, steering and ride control, collision avoidance, and
self-diagnostics. Today’s cars go faster, last longer, and work
better than Ford could ever have imagined.
However, if you strip away all the safety features and crea-
ture comforts from modern cars, you will find something a lot
like the Model Ts of a hundred years ago. If you look behind
the wheel, you will find people who long to go places their feet
can’t take them—just like their great-great-grandparents did.
A System of Systems
Modern automobiles are complex machines; the typical car
has some 15,000 parts. It might seem impossible to understand
how cars work, but just the opposite is true. The trick is to
divide the car into several systems: the engine, the drive train,
the lubrication system, etc. By learning how each system works
by itself and with other systems, you can understand how the
whole car functions.
First, though, we will look at some important information
about maintenance, registration, and safety, before moving on
to the automobile’s major systems.
Cars have come a long way since Henry Ford’s first horseless car-
riage, shown along with the 10 millionth model off the production
line. Some of today’s modern cars will do the navigating—or even
the parking!—for you.





12 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Maintenance, Registration, and Inspection.
Maintenance,
Registration, and
Inspection
You probably have heard the old saying that an ounce of preven-
tion is worth a pound of cure. Routine auto maintenance can
prevent a lot of costly problems, some of which could damage
the vehicle and even endanger the driver and passengers. By
properly maintaining a vehicle, you can spot problems as they
develop and extend the vehicle’s life by many years.
Some maintenance tasks must be done by a dealership or
other qualified service outlet. You can do others in your own
garage or driveway—or even at the gas pump while you are
filling the tank.
Scheduled Maintenance
The owner’s manual that comes with every new car includes
a section that describes when scheduled maintenance and
other services should occur. Each manual provides one schedule
for vehicles that rarely perform heavy-duty service and another
schedule for vehicles that are heavily used, including vehicles
that are driven mostly on short trips or in dusty conditions,
vehicles that idle often for long periods, and vehicles that
pull trailers.
A new car’s warranty covers the cost of repairs if problems occur during a
specified period. (This period is normally at least 12 months but can be as
long as 10 years for some parts). However, the warranty is valid only if the
car’s owner follows the recommended maintenance schedule. It is a good
idea to keep detailed records of all maintenance done on a car.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 13
.Maintenance, Registration, and Inspection
Each chart lists the items that require service at certain mileage or
time intervals. For example, Schedule 1 might recommend that
you change the engine oil every three months or 3,000 miles
(whichever comes first), while Schedule 2 might recommend
that you change the oil every 12 months or 7,500 miles.
Routine Maintenance
In between scheduled maintenance visits that require more
specialized service, you can take care of many maintenance
tasks yourself, many of which will be explained later in this
pamphlet. For now, here is a quick list of tasks you should
do regularly.
Look Under the Hood
Opening the hood on most cars is a
three-step process. First, after putting
the car in “park” and applying the
parking brake, pull the hood-release
handle inside the car. It is probably near
the driver’s seat or under the dashboard.
Second, find and release the latch under
the front edge of the hood. You may
have to check your owner’s manual for
the location. Lastly, hold the hood up
with one hand and use the other hand
to raise the hood support rod into place.
(Some hoods stay up by themselves
using springs or hydraulic cylinders.)
Be sure the support rod is securely
placed in the proper grommet or slot
so the hood won’t fall on you.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which means “to lessen
in force or intensity” and “to make less severe.” By taking precautions
to manage risk and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any incident
that might happen during automotive maintenance activities.


Typical Scheduled Maintenance Charts
Service and Maintenance 11-5
Maintenance Schedule
Additional Required
Services - Normal
12 000 km/7,500 mi
24 000 km/15,000 mi
36 000 km/22,500 mi
48 000 km/30,000 mi
60 000 km/37,500 mi
72 000 km/45,000 mi
84 000 km/52,500 mi
96 000 km/60,000 mi
108 000 km/67,500 mi
120 000 km/75,000 mi
132 000 km/82,500 mi
144 000 km/90,000 mi
156 000 km/97,500 mi
168 000 km/105,000 mi
180 000 km/112,500 mi
192 000 km/120,000 mi
204 000 km/127,500 mi
216 000 km/135,000 mi
228 000 km/142,500 mi
240 000 km/150,000 mi
Rotate tires and perform Required Services.
Check engine oil level and oil life percentage.
Change engine oil and filter, if needed.
Drain the diesel fuel filter of water. (Diesel Only)
@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @
Replace passenger compartment air filter. (1) @ @ @ @ @ @
Inspect evaporative control system. (2) @ @ @
2.0L Diesel Engine Only: Replace fuel filter. (3) @ @ @ @ @
Replace engine air cleaner filter. (4) @ @ @
Except 1.4L Engine: Replace spark plugs. Inspect
ignition coil boots. @
1.4L Engine Only: Replace spark plugs. Inspect
ignition coil boots. @ @
1.4L and 1.8L Engines Only: Change automatic
transmission fluid. @
1.8L Engine Only: Replace timing belt, idler
pulley, and timing belt tensioner. (7) @
2.0L Diesel Engine Only: Replace the timing belt,
timing belt tensioner, idler pulley, and water
pump. (7)
@
Drain and fill engine cooling system. (5) @
Visually inspect accessory drive belts. (6) @
Replace brake fluid. (7) @ @ @
Replace clutch fluid. (7) @ @ @


2015 - crc - 11/24/14
Service and Maintenance 11-7
Maintenance Schedule
Additional Required
Services - Severe
12 000 km/7,500 mi
24 000 km/15,000 mi
36 000 km/22,500 mi
48 000 km/30,000 mi
60 000 km/37,500 mi
72 000 km/45,000 mi
84 000 km/52,500 mi
96 000 km/60,000 mi
108 000 km/67,500 mi
120 000 km/75,000 mi
132 000 km/82,500 mi
144 000 km/90,000 mi
156 000 km/97,500 mi
168 000 km/105,000 mi
180 000 km/112,500 mi
192 000 km/120,000 mi
204 000 km/127,500 mi
216 000 km/135,000 mi
228 000 km/142,500 mi
240 000 km/150,000 mi
Rotate tires and perform Required Services.
Check engine oil level and oil life percentage.
Change engine oil and filter, if needed.
Drain the diesel fuel filter of water. (Diesel Only)
@ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @ @
Replace passenger compartment air filter. (1) @ @ @ @ @ @
Inspect evaporative control system. (2) @ @ @
2.0L Diesel Engine Only: Replace fuel filter. (3) @ @ @ @ @
Replace engine air cleaner filter. (4) @ @ @
Change automatic transmission fluid. @ @ @
Change manual transmission fluid. @ @ @
Except 1.4L Engine: Replace spark plugs. Inspect
ignition coil boots. @
1.4L Engine Only: Replace spark plugs. Inspect
ignition coil boots. @ @
1.8L Engine Only: Replace timing belt. (7) @
2.0L Diesel Engine Only: Replace the timing belt,
timing belt tensioner, idler pulley, and water
pump. (7)
@
Drain and fill engine cooling system. (5) @
Visually inspect accessory drive belts. (6) @
Replace brake fluid. (7) @ @ @
Replace clutch fluid. (7) @ @ @


16 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Maintenance, Registration, and Inspection.
Weekly Maintenance
Take time about once a week to do the following:
• Check the levels of oil, coolant, and windshield-washer fluid.
Top off the fluids if necessary.
• Visually inspect the tires for damage and excessive tread
wear. Use a tire pressure gauge to check for proper inflation.
Add air if necessary.
• Visually inspect the wiper blades for damage.
• Check the battery terminals for corrosion. If there is corro-
sion, you will see a gray or white powder on the terminals.
Make sure the connections are tight.
Battery Tips
In many new cars, the battery powers such computer
programming as the radio, clock, remote locks, and
even wireless communication capabilities. If the
battery power is cut off to these functions, it could
mean expensive reprogramming by the car dealer-
ship. Check the owner’s manual before disconnecting
the battery for cleaning.
Windshield-washer fluid goes in a reservoir beneath a cap displaying a windshield
wiper icon. The fluid includes detergent to clean the windshield and antifreeze to keep
it from freezing in cold weather.
Wear eye and
hand protection
when cleaning
a car’s battery
terminals. Battery
acid is corrosive
and extremely
dangerous for
eyes and skin.
Rubber or nitrile
gloves are
recommended.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 17
.Maintenance, Registration, and Inspection
Monthly Maintenance
Every month or so, add the following to the weekly
maintenance steps:
• Check the levels of transmission fluid, brake fluid, and
power-steering fluid.
• If the battery is not sealed, check its water level. (Most
batteries are sealed, but some older models might require
this step.) Refill it with distilled water if necessary.
• Inspect the spark-plug wires, other electrical connections,
hoses, and belts for damage and looseness.
• Wipe down door, trunk, and hood hinges. Apply white
grease lubricant.
• Wash the exterior and vacuum the interior. Apply a
commercial protectant to rubber, leather, and plastic surfaces
such as vinyl tops, rubber door seals, and tire sidewalls.
Checking the power steering fluid indicator and add power
steering fluid if it shows “low.”


18 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Maintenance, Registration, and Inspection.
Maintaining the Car’s Appearance
While keeping the engine and other internal systems is vital
in extending the life of a car, don’t forget to maintain the car’s
outside and interior, too.
Most older-model cars were painted with a clear-coat
finish that protects the metal or fiberglass car body and
provides an attractive shine. Clear-coat colors also are
easily matched if one panel of the car must be replaced after
an accident. Cleaning is a snap, too. If you use a commercial
car wash product, follow the instructions on the bottle and be
sure to use plenty of water to rinse the car completely. When
washing a vehicle, change the water often to avoid scratching
the vehicle finish with dirt caught in the sponge or mitten.
Use a soft chamois to remove rinse water and to avoid spot-
ting of windows, mirrors, and paint finish. Follow the wash
with a good exterior wax. Carefully follow the instructions
on the container to achieve the best results.
Maintaining the inside of the vehicle is easy as well. Use
a soft cloth along with a commercial interior protectant to
keep the dashboard and other interior features looking like
new and protected from the extreme temperature changes in
the summer and winter.
Belts and hoses that
need to be replaced
might feel brittle or
mushy when you
pinch them; they also
might show cracks.
To accurately check
the tension of belts,
you must use a
belt tension gauge.
However, you can
get a rough idea of
tension by depress-
ing the belt in the
middle of its longest
straight section.
The belt should
move approximately
½ inch. Modern
serpentine belts do
not show obvious
wear; use a
manufacturer-
approved wear
gauge to determine
if replacement
is needed.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 19
.Maintenance, Registration, and Inspection
Texas is among
the many
states that uti-
lize the “two
steps, one
sticker” pro-
cess for vehicle
registration
renewal. The
vehicle must first pass inspection. Then the driver can
renew the vehicle registration for a combined registra-
tion and inspection sticker to be displayed in the vehicle
window. The state adopted this policy to help eliminate
inspection sticker fraud and theft. Since the inspection is
now required, drivers will also need to comply with state
laws regarding vehicle safety and emissions testing.
At least in Texas, this means more cars on the road are
safer and environmentally friendly.
Vehicle Registration and Inspection
Every state requires a vehicle’s owner to register the vehicle
before driving it on public streets. This process helps to ensure
that the vehicle meets basic emissions and safety requirements,
that the owner has liability insurance, and that the state knows
who owns and operates the vehicle. The vehicle’s owner must
pay a fee, as well as a property tax, to register the vehicle and
receive license plates.
Many states require annual vehicle inspections. Some
inspections check for safety problems like defective brakes and
burned-out headlights. Others include testing for excessive tail-
pipe emissions. In these states, vehicles must pass inspection in
order to be registered.
To learn about the laws that apply in your state, check your state’s
website or look in the state government listings in your phone book
under “Department of Motor Vehicles” or “Vehicle Registration.” Make
sure you have your parent or guardian’s permission first.


20 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Vehicle Safety.
Vehicle Safety
Cars and trucks can weigh up to 2 tons. They travel down the
highway at speeds of 65 miles per hour or more. Often only a
few feet separate moving vehicles. Therefore, vehicle safety is
very important. Modern cars use both active and passive safety
features to help protect their occupants.
Active Restraints
Safety belts and child restraints are called active restraints
because you must do something, such as buckling them, to
make them work. When you use these features, you greatly
increase your chances of surviving an accident.
Passengers travel at the same speed as the car. If the car
suddenly stops (such as when it hits another object), they will
keep traveling at the original speed until something stops them.
That could be the windshield, the dashboard, the road—or a
safety belt.
Why are safety belts necessary? Take this example: A man is riding a simple vehicle
at any speed, and the vehicle stops suddenly. The rider does not stop until he hits
another object. Had a safety belt been in place, the rider would have stopped while
still in the seat.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 21
.Vehicle Safety
If you are wearing a safety belt, you will slow down when
the vehicle does. You will have more time to stop, you will stop
over a longer distance, and your strongest bones—not the bones
in your face—will absorb the force. That is why wearing safety
belts makes such good sense.
Safety Belts
Most safety belts have two parts: a seat belt that goes across
your lap and a shoulder belt that goes over your shoulder. Nearly
all states require the driver and passengers to be buckled in at
all times.
Child Car Seats
Have you ever seen someone
holding a baby while riding
in a car? Think about this:
In a crash at 25 miles
per hour, a 12-pound baby
would become a 240-pound
force, almost impossible to
hold on to. Fortunately, all
50 states require that babies
ride in infant restraints.
Some cars
have automatic
shoulder belts.
You must still
buckle the seat
belt to be safe.
Never rely on
the shoulder belt
by itself.
____________
Be sure to install
infant and child
car seats securely
and according to
the manufacturer’s
instruction.
AUTOMATIC
RETRACTOR
EMERGENCY
RELEASE
Seat and shoulder belts protect against frontal impacts.
To learn more about car seat safety laws, with your
parent or guardian’s permission, find the website
for your state’s public safety department.


22 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Vehicle Safety.
Passive Restraints
All cars built today offer passive restraints. These are safety fea-
tures that do not need the driver or passenger to do anything to
make them work. The most common passive restraints are air
bags. These devices stay in the steering wheel and dashboard
until needed. They protect the driver and front-seat passenger.
Air bags are required on all new passenger vehicles sold in the
United States.
Here is how an air bag works. If a front-end crash occurs,
sensors in the air bags notice that the car has suddenly slowed
down or even stopped (a process called deceleration). This trig-
gers a chemical reaction that fills the air bags with gas. In less
than 1/20 of a second, the air bags balloon out, cushioning the
driver and passenger.
It is important to remember that air bags are supplemental
restraints; they are designed to work with—not instead of—
safety belts.
Some cars
also include
side-impact air
bags, which open
if the car is hit
from either side.
Because air bags can open with lots of force, infants
and children under age 13 should always ride in the
back seat.
Air bags deploy automatically when a frontal crash occurs.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 23
.Vehicle Safety
Jumper cables
Safety on the Road
Accidents do happen, which is why drivers need to be prepared.
Just as you carry the Outdoor Essentials on camping trips, you
should carry an emergency kit in your car. Include these items:
• Jumper cables
• Spare fuses
• Two quarts of oil
• A gallon of coolant
• Aerosol tire inflator
• Two roadside flares
• A first-aid kit
• A “help” sign
• An ice scraper
• Windshield deicer
• Spare windshield wiper blades
• A multipurpose tool
• A flashlight
• Rags or paper towels
• A blanket
• Food and water
• A pen and paper
Ice scraper
Flashlight
Stay Safe While Working on Cars
Exercise caution at all times. A car’s engine, cooling
system, and drive train components get very hot, as do
their fluids. It is a good idea to always wear gloves and
safety glasses. You should also wear old clothing because
you will be working with oils, lubricants, and other fluids.
Never go under a vehicle that is not properly braced
with a jack stand. When working in the engine compart-
ment, disconnect the negative battery cable. This cuts off
power to all the car’s systems, so you will not get a shock
or accidentally damage electrical components. It also
prevents the electric cooling fan from coming on without
warning and hurting you.
Jack stands


Advanced driver assistance systems like these help make today’s new cars safer than ever.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 25
.Advanced Driver Assistance Systems
Advanced Driver
Assistance Systems
Many cars on the road today come equipped with advanced
driver assistance systems (ADAS) designed to help the driver be
more aware of hazards around them and possibly mitigate on
behalf of the driver if a hazardous condition is detected. These
systems have been shown to reduce accidents and save lives.
While ADAS can assist a driver with hazards — such as vehicles
in a blind spot or a pedestrian walking out into traffic — all
these systems still require an attentive driver behind the wheel.
Consult the owner’s manual to confirm what assistance
systems your vehicle has and the guidelines for their operation and
maintenance. Components such as radar modules, cameras, and
ultrasonic sensors might need to be recalibrated if disturbed while
performing other maintenance or if body damage occurs.
Each vehicle manufacturer names its ADAS systems. The
American Automobile Association (AAA) has suggested a standard
naming convention to reduce confusion among consumers.
Some Auto Safety Systems
• Adaptive cruise control • Forward collision warning
• Automatic high beams • Lane-keeping assistance
• Blind-spot warning • Rear cross-traffic warning
• Driver monitoring • Semi-automated parking assistance
• Forward automatic • Surround-view camera
emergency braking
Keep Up With ADAS Technology
National Highway Traffic Safety Administration:
nhtsa.gov/equipment/driver-assistance-technologies
SAE Levels of Driving Automation:
sae.org/blog/sae-j3016-update


26 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Engine.
The Engine
The engine is the single most important part of an automobile.
It burns fuel to create heat and then converts that heat into
mechanical motion, which makes the wheels go around and
makes the accessories work.
Types of Engines
For many years, nearly all cars and trucks had either gasoline
engines or diesel engines. Both engine types rely on internal com-
bustion, which means that the fuel is burned inside the engine.
More recently, gas-electric hybrid engines have appeared.
These vehicles have engines that are more fuel-efficient than
traditional engines. Automakers are now testing hydrogen
fuel-cell vehicles. During your lifetime, other kinds of engines
may become common.
Gasoline Engines
To understand how a gasoline engine works, think about a bicycle.
When you pedal a bicycle, your body burns the calories in the
food you have eaten. This creates the energy your muscles need to
move your legs up and down. The bicycle’s pedal system changes
this movement into circular (rotary) motion and sends the motion
to the rear wheel through a connecting chain and sprocket.
In a gasoline engine, the “legs” are pistons. Pistons are shafts
that slide up and down within tubes called cylinders. A mixture
of fuel and air enters the combustion chamber (the space inside
the cylinder), where a spark ignites it. This causes a rapid burn-
ing (a release of chemical energy) that pushes the piston down
inside the chamber. A connecting rod and crankshaft convert this
up-and-down motion (mechanical energy) into rotary motion. A
series of shafts and gears then sends this motion to the wheels of
the vehicle and makes them turn.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 27
.The Engine
Automobile engine operation is similar to pedaling a bicycle.
Combustion chamber components
CONNECTING
ROD
CRANKSHAFT
PISTON
Pistons
SPROCKET
Bicycle
CYLINDER
SPARK PLUG
PISTON
VALVE
INTAKE CAMSHAFT
EXHAUST CAMSHAFT
CONNECTING ROD
CRANKSHAFT
WATER JACKET
FOR COOLANT FLOW


28 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Engine.
Piston Engines
Most car engines have four, six, or eight cylinders of the same
size. In general, the more cylinders an engine has, the more
powerful it is.
The cylinders can be arranged in several ways (called
configurations), including inline (or straight), V, and opposed
(or boxer).
The inline-4 is the most common engine configuration.
The V-8 (with two rows of four cylinders) is a popular engine
formation in SUVs.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 29
.The Engine
INTAKE STROKE COMPRESSION STROKE
EXHAUST STROKE
POWER STROKE
INTAKE STROKE
POWER STROKE
INTAKE STROKE COMPRESSION STROKE
EXHAUST STROKE
POWER STROKE
INTAKE STROKE
POWER STROKE
Four-Stroke Cycle
It takes four steps, or strokes, for a piston to
create energy.
1. Intake Stroke. The intake valve opens,
and the piston moves down in the cylinder.
This pulls in an air-fuel mixture. Then the
intake valve closes.
2. Compression Stroke. When both valves
are closed, the spinning crankshaft pushes
the connecting rod, which forces the piston
up. The piston squeezes the air-fuel mixture
in the combustion chamber. This heats up
the air-fuel mixture and raises its pressure,
making it burn more easily and quickly and
produce more energy.
3. Power Stroke. As the piston reaches the
top of its stroke, a spark plug ignites the
compressed mixture. In about two thou-
sandths of a second, the mixture burns.
The gases expand, pushing the piston
downward. As the piston moves down-
ward, the connecting rod moves downward,
too, and turns the crankshaft, which pow-
ers the engine.
4. Exhaust Stroke. The exhaust valve opens
as the connecting rod pushes the piston
upward. The piston forces the burned gases
out of the combustion chamber through the
exhaust valve. At the top of the stroke, the
exhaust valve closes. The cylinder is now
ready for the next intake stroke.
Everything just described happens very
quickly. Depending on the car’s speed and
acceleration (how quickly it gains speed), the
crankshaft may rotate between about 700 and
7,000 revolutions per minute (RPM)!
Intake stroke
Compression stroke
SPARK
PLUG
BURNED
(EXHAUST)
GASES
Exhaust stroke
Power stroke
COMBUSTION
(BURNING)
OF FUEL
AIR AND
FUEL
PISTON
EXHAUST
VALVE
CYLINDER
CONNECTING
ROD TO
CRANKSHAFT
COMBUSTION
CHAMBER
INTAKE
VALVE


30 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Engine.
The Valve Train
As you might imagine, a simple four-stroke cycle would produce
a jerky motion, because only one stroke would produce power.
That is why, in a modern engine, different cylinders are always on
different strokes. At any point, one cylinder will be on the intake
stroke, one will be on the compression stroke, etc. A heavy spin-
ning weight called a flywheel at the rear of the engine provides
energy (momentum) to help keep the crankshaft turning.
The parts of the valve train work together to open and
close the valves at just the right moment. The key part is the
camshaft, which connects to the crankshaft with gears or a chain.
As the camshaft rotates, egg-shaped parts called cams open the
valves in the right order. (Springs on the valves close them.)
Modern engines have overhead cams. This means the
camshaft is above the valves, not below them near the crank-
shaft. Some more powerful engines have dual overhead cams
(DOHCs). In these engines, there are two intake and two
exhaust valves per cylinder.
In internal combustion engines, variable valve timing
(VVT) can be used to alter the timing of a valve lift event and
improve performance, fuel economy, or emissions. VVT may
be achieved with mechanical devices or electrohydraulic and
camless systems.
VALVE
PISTON
CONNECTING ROD
FLYWHEEL
CRANKSHAFT
MAIN BEARINGS
ROCKER ARM
PUSH ROD
VALVE LIFTER
CAMSHAFT
TIMING CHAIN
Engine valve train and flywheel
CAM LOBES


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 31
.The Engine
Gasoline-Electric Hybrid Vehicles
Strictly speaking, a hybrid vehicle is any vehicle that uses more
than one source of power. Mopeds are one example. They com-
bine the power of a gasoline engine with the rider’s pedaling
power. Locomotives are another example. They are typically
diesel-electric hybrids.
In the late 1990s, automakers began introducing gas-electric
hybrid cars. A gas-electric hybrid car has a gasoline engine that
is like (but smaller than) a typical car engine. It also has an
electric motor that helps power the car and its accessories, such
as power steering and air-conditioning. When the driver applies
the brake, the energy that is created recharges the battery.
Many car manufacturers are in the early stages of produc-
ing extended range electric vehicles (EREVs) and plug-in hybrid
electric vehicles (PHEVs).
Understanding Diesel Engines
In many ways, diesel engines are like gasoline engines. They belong to the
internal combustion family and share many features.
They use a different fuel, however, and the air-fuel mixture is not
ignited by a spark plug. Instead, the engine uses compression ignition.
This means that the intake stroke draws air into the cylinder by itself. The
piston compresses it to a much higher pressure than in a gasoline engine
(20:1 for diesel compared to 9.5:1 for gasoline). An injector then sprays
fuel into the chamber, and when it becomes hot enough, the fuel ignites.
BATTERIES
TRANSMISSION
FUEL TANKELECTRIC MOTOR
4-CYLINDER ENGINE
Gasoline-electric parallel hybrid drive train


The Engine.
How Electric Vehicles Work
An electric vehicle (EV) works differently than a traditional
gasoline car. Instead of using an internal combustion engine
that runs on gasoline, an EV uses an electric motor powered by
electricity stored in a large battery.
Here’s how:
1. Battery: EVs have a big battery pack, usually located under the
floor or in the back of the car. This battery stores electricity,
much like how your phone stores power. The battery is charged
by plugging it into a charging station or a wall outlet.
2. Electric Motor: The electric motor in an EV is like the engine
in a regular car, but it runs on electricity. When you step on
the accelerator pedal, the electric motor receives electricity
from the battery and uses it to generate motion. This motion
makes the car move.
3. Controller: The controller manages the flow of electricity
from the battery to the electric motor. It helps control the
speed and power of the motor, which is what allows you to
speed up, slow down, and steer.
4. Regenerative Braking: When you take your foot off the
accelerator pedal or hit the brakes, some EVs use a cool
feature called regenerative braking. This means the electric
motor acts like a generator, converting the car’s kinetic
energy back into electricity to recharge the battery a bit. It’s
like a little energy boost when you slow down.
5. Charging: To keep your EV running, you need to charge it by
plugging the car into a charging station or a wall outlet.
There are different types of chargers with
varying speeds—some can give you a
quick charge, while others take more
time but give you a lot of energy.
6. No Tailpipe Emissions: Unlike
regular cars that burn gasoline and
produce exhaust, EVs produce zero
tailpipe emissions. This means they’re
better for the environment and help
reduce air pollution.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 33
.The Engine
Today, most electric-vehicle charging occurs at the car owner’s home. Public charging
stations, which work much like a typical gas station, are becoming more common.
This process makes electric vehicles efficient and
eco-friendly. They are becoming more popular as technology
improves.


34 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Drive Train.
The Drive Train
The drive train is the set of parts, starting with the transmission,
that send power from the engine to the wheels. Most cars today
use front-wheel drive (FWD), so the drive train connects just to
the front wheels. Other vehicles use rear-wheel drive (RWD).
Many trucks and SUVs feature all-wheel drive (AWD) or four-
wheel drive (4WD), which means the transmission powers all
four wheels.
The Transmission
Every engine produces the most horsepower and torque (twist-
ing power) at or near a certain speed—say, 5,000 rpm. However,
the wheels do not always need the same amount of power, so
the transmission multiplies torque by sending power between
different-sized gears.
When a smaller gear turns a larger gear, the bigger gear
rotates more slowly and sends more power to the wheels. For
example, if a 3-inch gear turns a 6-inch gear (a 2:1 gear ratio),
the smaller gear turns twice as fast, but the larger gear creates
twice the torque.
The ratio between the size of two gears affects the torque the
gears generate.
RATIO 1:1 SPEED 100 RPM
SPEED 50 RPM
RATIO 2:1


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 35
.The Drive Train
You may have seen this idea at work on a bicycle. If your
chain is on a small chain ring in the front and a large sprocket
in the back, it will help you climb a very steep hill. If it is on
a large chain ring and a small sprocket, it will help you pedal
along a flat road at high speed.
A key difference between a car transmission and a bicycle
gear set is that on a bicycle, you can use any chain ring with
any sprocket. On a car, however, the gears on the input shaft
(coming from the engine) and the output shaft (going toward
the wheels) are always connected in pairs. Each time you shift
gears, the transmission tells a different pair of gears to send
power to the wheels.
There are two basic types of transmissions: manual
and automatic.
Manual Transmissions
With a manual transmission, just before shifting gears, the
driver must push a pedal down to release the clutch. This
temporarily disconnects the wheels from the engine so the
driver can select a gear by using a shift lever.
The clutch has a round disc, about the size of a dinner
plate, that is covered with friction material. When the clutch
pedal is out, this disc rests tightly against the engine flywheel.
This makes the transmission’s input shaft spin at the same
speed as the crankshaft.
Automatic Transmissions
An automatic transmission shifts itself. There is no clutch pedal;
the driver just has to move the shift lever to D (drive) to use the
car’s forward gears. Hydraulic (fluid) pressure flowing through
various pathways does all the work. An automatic transmission
senses engine speed and vehicle speed, and then picks the
appropriate gear ratio.
Manual transmissions are sometimes called
standard transmissions.


36 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Drive Train.
Other Drive Train Components
The makeup of the drive train varies depending on whether a
vehicle is FWD, RWD, or 4WD/AWD.
In FWD vehicles, the engine is mounted transversal; the
driveshaft goes from side to side, not front to back. A combina-
tion transmission and axle—called a transaxle—sends power
directly to axle shafts, which turn the front wheels.
In RWD vehicles, the engine, transmission, driveshaft, and
axle differential connect in a straight line like cars on a train.
Power from the engine makes a right turn at the rear axle differ-
ential, then the axle shafts send power to the rear wheels.
The drive trains on 4WD and AWD vehicles are set up like
those on RWD vehicles. The transfer case on the transmission
distributes power to the front wheels through a second drive-
shaft and front axle assembly.
The Differential
The differential is inside the rear axle housing (on RWD vehi-
cles) or the transaxle (on FWD vehicles). It has a special set of
gears, called a ring and pinion. The driveshaft turns the smaller
pinion gear, which sends power at a 90-degree angle to the ring
gear. As in the transmission, twisting power increases as the
smaller pinion turns the larger ring gear. Most axle gear ratios
are around 2.75:1, which gives good overall performance. A
lower ratio, such as 3.98:1, offers more fuel economy but slower
acceleration. A higher ratio, such as 2.10:1, creates more power
and acceleration.
The axle
differential is a
gear system that
allows a car’s
wheels to spin at
different speeds
during turns.
When the car
turns, each wheel
travels a slightly
different distance;
the differential
helps to even out
that difference
so the driver can
maintain control.
ENGINE
RWD
FWD
DRIVE TRAIN


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 37
.The Drive Train
Checking Transmission Fluids
Manual transmissions and rear
axles use gear lubricant, which
is a little heavier than motor oil.
This fluid does not need to be
changed unless there is a prob-
lem. You can check the level by
unscrewing the metal filler plug
while the vehicle is on a hoist.
Put your fingertip or a piece of wire into the opening. The
lubricant should be even with the opening’s lower edge.
Automatic transmissions use a lightweight fluid that not
only lubricates but also works the hydraulic circuits. Different
manufacturers call for slightly different types of fluid.
You can check the transmission fluid level with a dipstick,
which is usually at the rear of the engine compartment. Make
sure the shift lever is in park and set the parking brake. With
the engine idling, pull out the dipstick, wipe it off with a clean,
lint-free cloth, put it in again, and pull it out again. If the fluid
level is at or below the “Add” mark, top it off.
The transaxle on FWD cars with manual transmissions uses
a single fluid (similar to RWD cars). Cars with automatic trans-
missions use one fluid for the differential and another fluid for
the transmission part of the transaxle.
Transmission
fluid readings
are most accurate
after someone
has driven the
vehicle for 20
or so miles to
warm up
the fluid.
Checking the Power Steering Fluid
The power steering system uses hydraulic pressure to make it easy to
turn the steering wheel. Power steering fluid should be checked often and
replaced according to the specifications in
the owner’s manual. To check the fluid level,
take the cap off the top of the power steer-
ing pump, which usually can be found at the
front of the engine on the driver’s side. If fluid
is needed, add it to the reservoir. Some cars
have a clear plastic reservoir that lets you
check the level without taking the cap off. Rock
the car gently to see the fluid level.
COOL HOT
WARM
Checking the transmission fluid


38 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Wheels and Tires.
Wheels and Tires
Wheels and tires go together like peanut butter and jelly.
While we could make car wheels that did not need tires, the
ride would be very rough. (Imagine being pulled along in a
child’s wagon at 65 miles per hour!) Tires help soften the ride
and grip the road, even when the road is covered with rain,
snow, or mud.
Wheel Design
Most wheels are made of stamped steel. Others are made of
cast aluminum, which is stronger and can be made in different
designs for a special look. Four or five lug nuts connect the
wheel to the axle shaft.
Examples of various tire treads and wheels
AXLE
BOLT
WHEEL
TIRE
Lug nuts hold the wheel on the axle shaft.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 39
.Wheels and Tires
Tire Design
Every tire has three main parts: the tread, the sidewalls, and the
beads. The tread is the part that touches the road. Its grooves
are paths for water to run off, which improves traction (grip).
The sidewalls are between the tread and the wheel rim. These
smooth, flexible sections absorb shocks and cushion the ride.
They also create a space that holds air. The sidewalls end at the
beads, sturdy steel rings that hold the tire within the rim.
Directional tires have a one-way tread pattern that is opti-
mized for the direction the tires rotate on the car.
These tires are specifically made for either the
left or right side. The grooves are angled to make
handling easier and to channel water out from
under the tire on wet surfaces, which improves
traction and reduces the risk of hydroplaning.
Small arrows or triangles on the sidewall show
which way the tire is supposed to turn.
The tread pattern on nondirectional tires is
designed in a way that allows the tires to turn
in any direction.
Inside the Tire
The interior of the tire is strengthened with
several layers, or plies, of rubber-coated fabric
cord. In most car tires, called radial-ply tires,
these cords run at (or near) a right angle to the
center of the tire. These tires stay cooler, have a
softer ride, and have a longer tread life.
Most radial tires have steel belts, which
is why they are often called steel-belted radials.
The belts help the tires resist punctures and
help flatten the tread, which improves traction.
Tire Wear Indicators
Many tires have wear indicators
in the tread. When only about
1
⁄16 of an inch of tread is left,
you can see a band running
from one side of the tire to the
other. This means the tire is
near the end of its useful life.
Never mix
directional and
nondirectional
tires on the
same vehicle.
Here is a quick way to see if a tire has suffi-
cient tread: Stick a penny top first into one of
the grooves. If you
can see the top of
Abraham Lincoln’s
head, the tire should
probably be replaced.
RADIAL CORD
BODY PLIES
STABILIZER
BELTS
SIDEWALL
TREAD
BEAD
Most passenger car tires use
the radial-ply design.
Tire wear indicator
TREAD
WEAR BAND


40 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Wheels and Tires.
Tire Specifications
A sign on the driver-side door or doorjamb (or inside the glove
box or engine compartment) tells you the proper tire size, infla-
tion pressure, and sequence for rotating tires. Tires can also tell
you a lot of information about themselves.
Tire Size and Inflation
A typical passenger tire size is P215/65R15. These letters and
numbers are a code. Here is what that code tells you:
• P stands for passenger.
• 215 means the tire’s width is 215 millimeters.
• 65 means the tire’s height is 65 percent of its width
(the aspect ratio).
• R stands for radial-ply.
• 15 means the wheel’s diameter is 15 inches.
MA
N
U
F A
C
T
U
R
E
R
T
R
E
A
D
W
E
A
R
2
2
0
T
R
A
C
T
I O
N
A
1
T
E
M
P E R A T U R E A
Tire specifications are on the sidewall.
PASSENGER TIRE
WIDTH OF TIRE IN MILLIMETERS
ASPECT RATIO RADIAL LOAD INDEX AND
SPEED RATING
TREADWARE,
TRACTION, AND
TEMPERATURE GRADES
TIRE PLY COMPOSITION
AND MATERIALS USED
MAXIMUM COLD
INFLATION AND LOAD


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 41
.Wheels and Tires
You will find a tire’s size on its sidewall, along with some
other information:
• The maximum allowable inflation pressure in pounds per
square inch
• The tire’s load index and speed rating
• The tire’s maximum load rating
• Information about the tire’s construction
• The tire’s grades for tread wear, traction, and temperature
The most important of these numbers—and the easiest to under-
stand—is the inflation pressure. Tires work best and last longest
when they are properly inflated. In addition, fuel efficiency goes
down by 1 percent for every 3 pounds per square inch that tires
are underinflated.
You should check the pressure of all tires, including the
spare tire, once a month. Add air as needed with an air hose.
You can use a handheld tire gauge. (The round ones are more
accurate than the pen-shaped ones.) You can also use the gauge
that is part of the air hose.
If the inflation pressure listed on the tire is different
from the pressure noted on the vehicle, use the
pressure noted on the vehicle. It is what the
manufacturer recommends.
For an explanation
of other information
found on tires,
get your parent or
guardian’s
permission and visit
the SaferCar.gov
website.
Using a round tire pressure gauge


42 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Wheels and Tires.
Tire Rotation
Tires tend to wear unevenly, both front to rear and side to side.
To make them last longer, manufacturers recommend that you
regularly move them from wheel to wheel. This is called rotat-
ing the tires. Typically, you should rotate new tires after the first
7,500 miles and then every 15,000 miles.
Wheel Alignment and Tire Wear
Wheels may look like they are set straight up and down, but
they are actually set at slight angles to help improve vehicle
handling and tire life. It is important to keep wheels aligned;
misaligned wheels will shorten the life of your tires.
NONDIRECTIONAL TIRES
DIRECTIONAL TIRES
Directional and nondirectional tires have different
rotation patterns.
FRONT
WHEEL ROTATION
FRONT
WHEEL ROTATION


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 43
.Wheels and Tires
Camber
Camber is the inward or outward tilt of the wheel, as seen from
the front of the vehicle. It is measured in degrees between verti-
cal and the tire’s centerline. Inward tilt is negative camber.
Outward tilt is positive camber.
Caster
Caster is the angle that the
steering axis is offset from
the vertical, as viewed from
the side. It increases directional
stability, such as when the
car is on an unstable surface
(rough or slick, for instance).
(That is why the fork on a
bicycle connects at an angle
to the hub of the front wheel.)
Caster is measured in degrees.
Backward tilt is positive caster.
Forward tilt is negative caster.
A front wheel, viewed from the front of the car
POSITIVE
CAMBER 0° 0°
NEGATIVE
CAMBER
A front wheel, viewed from the
side of the car
FRONT OF CAR
STEERING AXIS
POSITIVE
CASTER
ANGLE NEGATIVE
CASTER
ANGLE
CASTER
ADJUSTING
NUTS
TIE STRUT
VERTICAL


44 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Wheels and Tires.
How to Change a Tire
Road hazards like nails and broken glass can puncture a tire’s tread. When
that happens, you need to be able to change the tire. In most cars, you
will find the spare tire under the floor of the trunk. A jack and lug wrench
should also be there. Before you begin, put the transmission in park (or in
gear if it is a manual transmission), and apply the parking brake. Have the
spare tire, jack, and lug wrench handy. Then follow
these key steps in changing a tire.
Step 1—Stabilize (chock) the wheel that is diago-
nally opposite the flat tire by putting bricks, logs,
or other heavy objects in front of and behind it.
Step 2—Pry off the wheel cover or hub ornament
with the narrowed end of the lug wrench.
Step 3—Loosen, but do not take off, the lug nuts
with the wrench. You may have to step on the end
of the lug wrench to make it turn.
Step 4—Find the notch under the door panel near-
est the flat tire, and center the jack there. Turn the
handle of the jack clockwise until the wheel is all
the way off the ground.
Step 5—Remove the lug nuts and put them in a
safe place, such as inside the wheel cover. Then,
pull the wheel off the vehicle.
Step 6—Put on the new wheel and tire.
Step 7—Put the lug nuts back on with the tapered edges
facing inward; hand-tighten them.
Step 8—Lower the vehicle by turning the jack handle
counterclockwise. Remove the jack.
Step 9—Tighten the lug nuts all the way, following
the order in the picture. Put the wheel cover or hub
ornament back on. Put the jack and lug wrench back
in the trunk, along with the flat tire. Get the flat tire
fixed as soon as possible. Tighten the lug
nuts in this order.
12
3
4
5
1
3


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 45
.Wheels and Tires
Toe-In/Toe-Out
The toe of a tire is measured in fractions
of an inch. It affects how evenly the tire
will wear. A wheel’s toe measurement is
the difference in the distance between
the front edges and the back edges of a
pair of tires. Toe-in means the front
edges of the tires are closer together.
Toe-out means they are farther apart.
Incorrect wheel alignment causes abnormal tire wear.
Condition
Effect
Cause
Correction Adjust pressure to
specifications when tires are cool;
rotate tires.
Adjust
camber to
specifications.
Adjust
toe-in to
specifications.
Dynamic or
static
balance
wheels.
Rotate tires
and inspect
suspension.
Under-
inflation or
lack of
rotation
Overinflation
or lack
of rotation
Under-
inflation or
excessive
speed
Excessive
camber
Incorrect
toe
Unbalanced
wheel
Lack of
rotation of
tires or
worn or out-
of-alignment
suspension
Rapid Wear
at Shoulders
Rapid Wear
at Center
Cracked
Treads
Wear on
One Side
Feathered
Edge
Bald Spots Scalloped
Wear
Or tire
defect
Tire Wear Patterns
Disposing of Old Tires
Tires eventually wear out. They must be disposed of properly. Ask a local
tire dealer about local rules for getting rid of old tires. Millions of tires are
recycled every year. They become things like playground mulch, patio
decking, and even artificial reefs.
Front wheel toe alignment viewed from
top of car
TOE-IN


46 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Braking System.
The Braking System
The braking system allows the driver to control the speed of the
vehicle by applying frictional force (resistance) to the rotating
wheels. This slows or stops the vehicle.
How the Braking System Works
Two things happen when the driver’s foot pushes the brake
pedal down. First, a hydraulic (fluid-filled) circuit multiplies
this pedal pressure and sends it to all four wheels. Second, the
hydraulic pressure at each wheel pushes against brake pads or
linings, which have a special cloth called frictional material
attached. These pads or linings rub against a rotating cylinder
called a drum or rotor that is attached to the wheel. Friction
makes the wheel slow down.
When the driver presses the brake pedal, the master cylinder
piston moves forward, creating braking force at the wheels.
MASTER CYLINDER
FLUID FLOW
BRAKE
PEDAL
FLUID FLOW
TO FRONT BRAKES TO REAR BRAKES


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 47
.The Braking System
What Is Friction?
Friction is resistance to motion. If you run on a gym floor in
hard-soled shoes, you will slide when you try to stop or change
direction quickly. If you are wearing sneakers, it is much easier
to stop and turn. That is because rubber has higher friction than
other materials. Automotive brakes need to be made of much
tougher materials than shoes. They are made of special com-
pounds that lose heat quickly and wear very slowly.
Hydraulic Circuit
The brake pedal is attached to a master cylinder, which holds
two containers (reservoirs) of brake fluid and two plungers. When
you apply the brake pedal, the plungers force fluid through steel
tubing to the wheels. The fluid presses against wheel cylinders,
which in turn move the brake pads or linings to create friction.
This changes motion energy into heat energy that goes out
easily into the air.
The brake system needs hydraulic pressure to build up
when the driver presses the brake pedal. If there is a leak in
the system, pressure cannot build up and the brakes will not
work. To prevent dangerous brake failure, modern cars have
two separate brake circuits. (That is why the master cylinder
has two fluid reservoirs and two plungers.) If one circuit has
a leak, there will still be braking power in the other. Typically,
the circuits are cross-linked, which means that one circuit
powers the left-front and right-rear brakes, while the other
powers the right-front and left-rear brakes.
Types of Braking Systems
There are two major types of brakes: drum brakes and disc
brakes. Drum brakes force curved pads, called brake shoes, to
rub against the inside of an iron drum. Disc brakes use pairs of
levers, called calipers, that clamp small brake pads against the
sides of a spinning iron disc, called a rotor. (This is how bicycle
brakes work, too.)
Disc brakes are better for severe operating conditions,
because air cools the rotor, helping heat go away more quickly.
New cars usually have drum brakes in the rear and disc brakes
in the front. High-performance models have disc brakes at all
four wheels.


48 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Braking System.
Antilock Brakes
To stop or slow a moving vehicle, you need two kinds of friction:
friction between the brakes and the wheels and friction between
the wheels and the road. If the driver hits the brakes too hard
and the wheels lock up (stop turning), the car can skid out of
control. An antilock braking system (ABS) keeps the wheels
from locking up by adjusting the amount of pressure they
apply to each brake.
When sensors feel that a wheel is about to stop turning, the
ABS computer tells the brake system’s hydraulic control unit to
use less braking force at the wheel or wheels that are about to
lock. This balances the braking at all four wheels and gives the
driver better control of the vehicle.
In order for ABS brakes to work properly, the driver should
apply steady pressure to the brake pedal rather than pumping
it. If the driver can hear mechanical noise or notice “pulsing”
during a hard brake, the ABS system is working.
Brake Maintenance
Brake fluid levels can go down over time. They can go down
quite fast if there is a leak in the system. Brake pads and linings
must be replaced periodically. How quickly they wear out depends
on drivers’ habits, such as how hard and how often they brake
and whether they drive in a lot of stop-and-go traffic.
Checking the Brake Fluid
To check the brake fluid, take the cap off the
top of the master cylinder. It is on the driver’s
side of the engine compartment near the
firewall (protective barrier that separates
the passenger from the engine). If necessary,
top off the fluid with fresh brake fluid. Use
the kind called for in the owner’s manual
(probably DOT 3).
Some cars use a clear plastic top that lets
you check the fluid level without taking off
the cap. Rocking the car gently helps you
easily see the fluid level.
Checking the brake fluid


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 49
.The Braking System
Inspecting the Brakes
Most manufacturers recommend that you check the brakes after
the first 6,000 miles, then at every scheduled service interval.
You should check the brakes as soon as possible if you notice
any of these problems:
• The brake indicator or ABS indicator on the dashboard
lights up.
• The brake pedal goes almost to the floor before you feel the
brakes go on. This could indicate a low brake fluid level or a
fluid leak.
• You hear a squealing sound. This could mean that the brake
pads are wearing thin.
• You feel vibration or shaking or hear the sound of metal on
metal; this could mean that the rotors are damaged.
To check your brakes, safely jack and support the vehicle, then
remove the wheel and assembly. Remove the brake drum, if
there is one. Check the pads or linings for wear, and replace
them if the frictional material is worn to within about 2/32 inch
(1.588 mm) or less of the metal shoe. Inspect the rotors and
look inside the drums for damage or overheating. These
problems will cause a bluish color. Light scratch marks are
acceptable, but if the marks are more than 0.015 inch (1
⁄64 inch)
deep, you need to replace the rotor or drum or take it to a shop
that can machine it to make the surface smooth again.
Disc brake pads
Drum brake shoes


50 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Air Intake and Fuel Systems.
The Air Intake
and Fuel Systems
As mentioned earlier, automobile engines burn a mixture of fuel
and air. The air intake and fuel systems work together to create
this mixture.
Operating Principles
The air intake and fuel systems use many different devices and
subsystems, including a computer called the engine control unit,
to make sure the engine uses the right mixture of air and fuel.
These systems may seem complex, but they rely on three basic
principles: air-fuel mixture, pressure, and gasoline vaporization.
Typical fuel injection system
FUEL INJECTORS
FUEL RETURN LINE
FUEL PUMP
FUEL CAP
FUEL TANK
FUEL FILTER
FUEL SUPPLY LINE
FUEL RAIL
FUEL PRESSURE
REGULATOR


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 51
.The Air Intake and Fuel Systems
Air-Fuel Mixture
The combustion process creates power by
burning a mixture of air and gasoline. The
amounts of each, however, change all the time
because of differences in temperature, vehicle
speed, and terrain. The engine burns fuel best,
with the most complete combustion and the
lowest emissions, when it mixes 14.7 parts of
air with one part of gasoline. This is written as
14.7:1 and is called the air-fuel ratio. (Because
the engine needs such a precise ratio, the
air-fuel ratio is computer-controlled.)
The car may need a rich mixture, with
less air and relatively more fuel (like a ratio
of 8.0:1), when starting on a cold morning or
when speeding up to pass another vehicle. A
lean mixture, with more air and relatively less fuel (like a ratio
of 17.0:1), may be all the car needs to cruise at low speed with
a warm engine.
Vacuum and
Pressure Relationships
Air inside a balloon is under much
higher pressure than air outside.
That is why the air will rush out
of a balloon if you do not tie the
end. The same principle is at work
inside a car engine.
As the piston moves downward,
it leaves a vacant space of low pres-
sure called a vacuum. Air rushes in
to fill the space. As this airstream
flows into the engine, the engine
takes in gasoline to create the
combustible air-fuel mixture.
Different air-fuel ratios are required
for different operating conditions.
GAS
GAS
LEAN
17 TO 1
RICH
8 TO 1
AIR
AIR
Higher atmospheric pressure makes air flow
into the engine. The intake stroke creates a
vacuum (low pressure).
ATMOSPHERIC PRESSURE
BARREL
AIRSTREAM MANIFOLD
VACUUM
PISTON


52 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Air Intake and Fuel Systems.
Preparing Gasoline for Combustion
Liquid gasoline will not burn. When you see flames above a pool
of gasoline, you are really seeing gasoline vapors on fire. Turning
liquid gasoline into flammable vapors (called atomization) is one
of the main functions of the fuel system. It does this by spraying
droplets of fuel into the airstream. This is similar to the way a
spray bottle works. These tiny droplets of gasoline heat up and
vaporize just before they go into the combustion chamber.
The fuel system first breaks gasoline into droplets, much like a
spray bottle for household cleaner works. The engine’s heat then
vaporizes the droplets as they go into the combustion chamber.
VAPOR
AIR
FUEL
A backfire occurs when the air-fuel mixture explodes
outside the combustion chamber.


.The Air Intake and Fuel Systems
T h e Air
Intake System
Engines use lots of air. Remember the 14.7:1 air-fuel ratio? It
describes the amounts by weight. Because air is lighter than
gasoline, the average engine uses about 9,000 gallons of air for
each gallon of gasoline!
Air enters the engine through the air intake system at
an inlet tube, passes through an air filter, enters an intake
manifold, and then passes through an intake valve into a
combustion chamber.
Besides pulling air into the engine, the air intake system
also filters dust and dirt particles from the airstream. These
things can cause serious damage inside the engine due to
abrasion or plugged passageways.
Most engines use a paper filter to clean the incoming air.
The paper is treated with a resin (a sticky substance
made from petroleum) and has folds like an
accordion. The filter has a metal screen out-
side and a fine wire mesh inside to resist
engine backfires. The filter is inside an air
cleaner assembly, typically located in a
rectangular box at the side of the engine.
Flat air cleaner assembly
Air filters are either flat, as shown in the
illustration above, or round like this one.
LID
FILTER
AIR CLEANER HOUSING


54 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Air Intake and Fuel Systems.
Air Filter Maintenance
The air filter traps debris (waste) in the paper. Eventually the
small pores of the paper plug up. You should check the filter
from time to time and replace it if there is too much debris.
Refer to the owner’s manual for the recommended replacement
interval (typically 30,000 miles) and step-by-step instructions.
The Fuel System
Metering is the process of measuring gasoline and delivering it
to the engine. A car can use one of two methods to meter gaso-
line: carburetion and fuel injection. Carburetion relies on the
vacuum that incoming air creates to add fuel to the engine. Fuel
injection uses computer-controlled jets to atomize fuel and
pump it into the cylinders.
Fuel injection is more efficient than carburetion and creates
less pollution. All cars sold in the United States since about 1990
have used fuel injection.
Checking the air filter
The Department
of Energy reports
that changing
a clogged air
filter can improve
fuel efficiency
by as much as
10 percent.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 55
.The Air Intake and Fuel Systems
Fuel Injection
Fuel injectors are computer-controlled valves that shoot precise
amounts of atomized fuel into the engine. When you press the
accelerator, a throttle valve opens and lets air into the engine.
(The gas pedal should really be called the air pedal!) The engine
control unit senses this action and turns on the fuel injectors.
How much fuel does the engine need? This depends on
many factors, including engine speed, engine load, barometric
pressure, airflow, coolant temperature, throttle valve angle,
and exhaust oxygen content. Based on these factors, the engine
control unit decides how long to keep each injector open (the
pulse width) and exactly when to inject the fuel so it will hap-
pen when the piston is on the intake stroke.
The injectors may be located in the throttle body itself or in
the intake manifold near each cylinder:
• In throttle-body fuel injection, one or two injectors add fuel to
the air before it reaches the cylinders.
• In multiport fuel injection, there is an injector near each
cylinder. Half the injectors fire at a time.
• In sequential fuel injection, an injector near each cylinder
fires just before the cylinder opens. Most cars sold in the
United States use sequential fuel injection.
The Fuel Tank and Fuel Delivery System
The fuel tank is at the rear of the vehicle. Fuel leaves it through
a device called a fuel pickup, which is covered with a finely
woven fabric or metal screen that traps large particles of dirt,
rust, scale, and moisture. It seldom requires replacement.
Locate your fuel filler cap, which is probably on one of
the car’s rear quarter panels. Some older cars, however,
hide filler caps behind the license plate or even behind
a taillight!


56 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Air Intake and Fuel Systems.
A fuel pump forces fuel through metal tubing to the fuel
injection system. The pump is usually inside the fuel tank.
A second fuel filter is either on the top of the fuel pump
module/pressure regulator assembly or in the fuel line. If this
filter is outside the fuel tank, it may be either under the car or
in the engine compartment. The filter element may be made of
pleated paper or another material.
Fuel Filter Maintenance
The inline filter traps very small pieces of debris so they do
not plug fuel system passages. Some of these pieces are smaller
than the diameter of a human hair. Most newer vehicles do not
specify how often to check fuel filters. Use common sense. If the
engine seems to be starving for fuel, check the filter. Replace the
filter if it is dirty.
FILLER NECK FUEL TANK BAFFLE VAPOR LINE
FUEL LINE
WIRE TO FUEL GAUGE
FUEL-GAUGE SENDING UNIT
Typical fuel filter
CAP
Fuel tank FLOAT
FILTER


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 57
.The Air Intake and Fuel Systems
Fuel Additives
After crude oil is refined into gasoline, producers add
compounds (different kinds of chemicals) to make it
a better fuel. These include inhibitors, which keep the
system clean by controlling sticky deposits and slowing
corrosion (rust), and detergents, which keep deposits
from building up. (This is important in fuel-injected
engines, which have very small openings.) In winter,
manufacturers may add alcohol, which keeps gas lines
from freezing. Because of local emission laws, some
states require manufacturers to sell winter and summer
blends of fuels according to the season.
For many years, manufacturers added lead to pre-
vent a pinging sound made during acceleration and to
lubricate valves. However, lead is a health hazard and
also can hurt a car’s catalytic converter (a device that
reduces exhaust emissions). Today U.S. gas stations sell
only unleaded gasoline. Gasoline manufacturers use
other additives to prevent pinging.


58 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Lubrication System.
The Lubrication System
When pistons and other engine parts move, they make friction
and heat. Oil reduces the friction and carries away the heat. It
also reduces corrosion and works as a seal to keep combustion
gases from passing between the piston and cylinder walls.
How Oil Circulates Through the Engine
Engine oil goes in a pan at the bottom of the engine. This pan
is called the crankcase because the crankshaft rotates in it and
splashes oil on various surfaces. An oil pump forces the oil
through all parts of the engine. Gravity makes the oil return
to the crankcase.
As the oil flows through the engine, it passes through an
oil filter, which takes out rough particles the oil has picked up.
Most filters are made of paper that is soaked in resin and folded
like an accordion.
Lubrication system components
CAMSHAFT BEARINGS
OIL PICK-UP
CRANKSHAFT
BEARINGS
FILTER
OIL PASSAGE
TO TENSIONER
OIL PUMP


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 59
.The Lubrication System
Types of Oil
Different engines and different operating conditions need
different types of oil. The Society of Automotive Engineers
and the American Petroleum Institute have codes that
define various oil types.
The API has a two-letter code that starts with S for
gasoline engines and C for diesel engines. The second letter
tells you the general quality level. Letters nearer the end of
the alphabet mean higher quality. For example, SM (the
standard as of 2004) is better than SL.
Diesel service codes have a number at the end to indicate a
four-stroke or two-stroke engine: CJ-4 (the standard as of 2006)
is for four-stroke engines. If an oil works in both gasoline and
diesel engines, it will have a code like SM/CJ-4.
The SAE number tells you the oil’s viscosity rating, which
measures how easily the oil flows. When oil is cold, it gets heavy
and thick like pancake syrup. When it is hot, oil is light-colored
and runny like water. Manufacturers measure an oil’s viscosity
when it is cold and give it a number like 10W. (W stands
for winter.)
Most cars today need multiple viscosity oil, which is made
to be thin at low temperatures but thicker at high temperatures.
This type of oil has a code such as SAE 5W-30. The 5W tells you
the viscosity when cold. The 30 tells you the viscosity when the
engine reaches operating temperature (generally about 200 F).
Checking and Adding Oil
Each vehicle’s owner’s manual states
the type and amount of oil the vehicle
needs and how often you should
change the oil and filter. A standard
interval is every three months or
3,000 miles; some auto manufacturers
suggest longer intervals.
Between oil changes, you should
check the oil level often. Pull out the
dipstick (a long metal rod with a curved
handle), wipe it with a clean, lint-free
rag, put it in, then pull it out again.
The level of oil in the crankcase will
show on the dipstick. If the level is at
or below the “ADD” mark, add more oil.
Look for the API
symbol on the oil
container to
determine the oil’s
performance level
and viscosity.
The lower the
SAE number,
the more easily
the oil flows.


60 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Lubrication System.
Changing the Oil
It is best to have an experienced adult help you when
you change your car’s oil. Before you begin, check the
owner’s manual to determine the types and/or sizes you
need of the following materials.
■■ Use the recommended number of quarts and the type
of engine oil suggested by the manufacturer in the
car owner’s manual. Keep an extra quart on hand to
top off the oil if your regular maintenance shows that
the oil level is low.
■■ 1 oil pan suitable for disposing of the used oil
Be sure the car is “cold” when doing an oil change.
Otherwise, the oil will be too hot to handle. Make
sure the pan is large enough to catch all of the oil
from your vehicle.
■■ Prepare the vehicle. Park it on a level surface, engage
the parking brake, and turn off the engine. If you
need to raise the vehicle, you will need ramps or a
jack and jack stands made to be used for this type of
auto maintenance work. Raise the front of the vehicle
by having an adult drive it onto a ramp or by jack-
ing it up and supporting it with jack stands properly
in place. (Be sure you work under the supervision of
your merit badge counselor or a knowledgeable adult
and follow the manufacturer’s instructions.)
If you change
oil yourself,
you should
dispose of the
used oil
properly. Put it
in a leakproof
container, label
it, and take it
to a recycling
facility. Do the
same with used
oil filters.
Caution: Never get under a vehicle
supported only by a jack! Jack stands or
wheel chocks (if you are using a ramp)
are recommended to help prevent wheels
on the ground from rolling. Be sure to
use the jack provided by the manufacturer only in the
manner specified by that carmaker and in the owner’s
manual. The jack provided by the manufacturer is meant
to be used only when changing a tire.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 61
.The Lubrication System
Step 1—Remove the oil fill cap and put it in a safe place.
Step 2—Slide under the engine and position the oil drain pan directly
underneath the engine pan plug.
Step 3—Use a wrench to loosen, then remove, the
drain plug. (Remember to keep the oil drain pan
underneath!) Oil will begin to drain immediately.
Step 4—Slide out from under the car while the
oil drains completely. The process takes several
minutes, and you are safer out from under the
vehicle than you would be underneath it.
Step 5—When the oil has completely stopped
draining from the engine oil pan, return to your
position under the car and replace the drain plug. Be sure to tighten the plug
to prevent oil leaks when you add the new oil.
Step 6—Position the drain pan under the oil filter, then remove the filter by
turning it counterclockwise. Carefully place the filter into the drain pan.
Step 7—Use a bit of new oil to coat the rubber gasket on the base of
the new oil filter, then use your hands to screw the filter into place,
about three-quarters of a turn after the gasket makes contact.
Step 8—Move the oil pan and filter out of the way. With an adult’s
assistance, reposition the jack under the car and jack the car back up so
that you can remove the jack stands. Then slowly lower the car back to
the ground. OR, if you used ramps, remove the
chocks and have an adult roll the car back off of
the ramps. Reset the parking brake.
Step 9—Add the recommended number of
quarts of oil and replace the oil cap.
Step 10—Start the car and allow it to idle for
about five minutes. The “check engine oil” light
on the dash probably will remain lit until the
new oil makes its way through the system.
Step 11—Check for leaks underneath the car. If
oil is leaking onto the pavement, you will need
to tighten the drain plug.
Step 12—Check the oil level. It should read “full.”
3
9
12


62 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Cooling System.
The Cooling System
Gasoline burns at temperatures as high as 4,500 degrees
Fahrenheit, so a gas engine makes large amounts of heat. Only
about 25 percent of this heat is used to create power. About
35 percent passes out of the exhaust system into the air, and
10 percent is lost to internal friction and lubrication.
The cooling system carries away the remaining 30 percent
of heat. If the cooling system fails, engine oil evaporates, and
parts can lock up or even melt, damaging or even destroying
the engine.
How the Cooling System Works
A belt-driven water pump at the front of the engine circulates
coolant (a mixture of water and antifreeze) through water pas-
sages inside the engine block and cylinder head. This transfers
heat from the metal to the liquid coolant. The coolant then
passes through tubes in the radiator.
Thin metal fins attached to the tubes give the tubes much
more surface area, which helps speed the cooling process. The
fins conduct heat away from the coolant and into the pass-
ing stream of air. When the vehicle is standing still or moving
slowly, a fan blade helps pull air through the radiator.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 63
.The Cooling System
Coolant Temperature Control
When you first start a vehicle, there is no need for cooling.
The engine must come up to operating temperature as fast as
possible to ensure maximum performance, good oil flow, and
in wintertime, heat
for the passengers.
When the engine is
cold, a thermostat
closes, blocking cool-
ant flow through the
radiator. Coolant can
circulate only
through the engine.
When the engine
coolant temperature
rises to about 195 degrees, the thermostat valve opens and cool-
ant flows through it from the engine to the radiator.
Cooling system components
WATER PUMP
OVERFLOW
RECOVERY
TANK
RADIATOR
CAP RADIATOR
HOSE
THERMOSTAT
HEATER
CONTROL
HEATER
CORE
HEATER
HOSES
AIR FLOW
RADIATOR


64 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Cooling System.
Pressurized Radiator Cap
To provide efficient cooling, a special radiator cap pressurizes
the system and increases the coolant’s boiling point to more
than 250 degrees Fahrenheit. Never unscrew or remove the radia-
tor cap when the engine is hot. The hot coolant can spray out
and cause severe burns.
It bears repeating: Never
unscrew the radiator cap
when the engine is hot.
Choosing the Right Type of Coolant
Make sure to follow the vehicle manufacturer’s
advice when choosing an engine coolant.
There are three basic types of coolants in
today’s market:
IAT (inorganic acid technology). This type, dyed
bright green, is commonly used in cars made
before the late 1990s. An IAT coolant contains
phosphate and silicate chemical compounds
that help protect the cooling system from corrosion. The fluid should be
flushed out of the vehicle’s system roughly every two years or 30,000 miles.
OAT (organic acid technology). As the name suggests, this type does not offer
phosphate or silicate corrosion inhibitors, but some brands include special
additives to do that job. OAT coolants are dyed dark green and can last much
longer than IAT brands, up to five years or 150,000 miles.
HOAT (hybrid organic acid technology). These coolants mix OAT with
corrosion inhibitors and last the same length of time as OAT coolants. HOAT
coolants contain 10 percent recycled antifreeze and are dyed orange; if no
recycled antifreeze is used, the coolant is dyed yellow.
The best choice of coolant may also depend on the climate in which
the vehicle is being driven. In northern areas with periods of extreme cold
temperatures, an antifreeze mixture is recommended so the fluid will remain
liquid and function properly throughout the year. In significantly warmer
climates, a water-based coolant without freeze protection may be sufficient.
Most antifreezes are made with ethylene glycol, a type of alcohol made
from ethane. Mixtures using propylene glycol, a compound made from pro-
pane, are also available and considerably less toxic to the environment.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 65
.The Cooling System
Coolant
Manufacturers generally recommend an equal mixture of water
and ethylene-glycol antifreeze. This coolant mixture offers good
cooling during the summer and protects the engine down to
about 35 degrees below zero Fahrenheit in the winter.
Some manufacturers now sell prediluted coolant. When you
use this type of coolant, you should not add water.
Cooling System Maintenance
Coolant should be checked regularly and replaced about every
30,000 miles or two years, or up to five years in some newer
vehicles. The system also might need to be flushed if there is too
much dirt and rust in the coolant.
To check the car’s coolant in most new cars, you need
only to check the coolant level on the plastic coolant reservoir
and, if necessary, add coolant there.
If your car does not have one of these reservoirs, you will
need to remove the radiator cap to check the fluid—but only if
the engine is cool. To remove the cap, wrap a cloth around the
cap and slowly loosen it to the first stop. Step back and let the
pressure release. Then, with the cloth still in place, press down
and slowly turn the cap until it is free.
Coolant reservoir


66 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Cooling System.
Flushing and Replacing Coolant
Before you begin, let the engine cool completely. Here
are the key steps in flushing and replacing coolant.
Step 1—Find the radiator drain plug and place a large
pan underneath it. Remove the drain plug and let the
coolant drain into the pan. (If the engine is cold, you
can remove the radiator cap to speed up drainage.)
Step 2—When the coolant has drained completely,
replace the drain plug and refill the radiator with
tap water.
Step 3—Start the engine and let it reach operating
temperature. Run the engine for a few minutes to
make the water circulate through the engine. Then let
the engine cool completely, and drain the radiator fluid
into the pan again.
Step 4—Replace the drain plug, and refill the radiator
with an equal mixture of distilled water and coolant.
Step 5—With the radiator cap off, start the engine. This
will force air out of the system.
Step 6—Top off the coolant and replace the radiator cap.
Dispose of the old coolant in accordance with local
laws. Never pour it on the ground.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 67
.The Cooling System
Inspecting Hoses and Belts
From time to time, inspect the hoses, clamps,
and drive belts for wear or damage, and check
drive-belt tension. If you do not have a tension
gauge, push down on the belt halfway between
the two pulleys. It should move about half an
inch. If there is too much movement, the belt is
loose. Adjust the proper drive belt bracket.
Checking drive belt tension
Check with local authorities on the proper
way and place to dispose of hazardous
waste like used motor oil and antifreeze.
This publication is used with the permission of the City of Fort Worth, Texas.


68 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Ignition and Electrical Systems.
The Ignition and
Electrical Systems
The engine gives a car most of its power, but electricity makes
the car start, fires the spark plugs, and runs such features as the
headlights and the sound system.
The ignition system uses electrical power to make a spark
in the combustion chamber, which ignites the air-fuel mix-
ture. The battery provides the power to start the engine. While
the engine is running, the charging system keeps the battery
charged. When the engine is off, the battery sends electricity to
the lights, sound system, and other electrical systems.
The Ignition System
The ignition system creates the sparks that make the cylinders
fire. The most important part of this system is the spark plug at
the top of each cylinder, which has a gap in it. When there is
enough electrical power (as much as 40,000 to 50,000 volts),
electricity jumps this gap. This causes an arcing effect that
makes the air-fuel mixture in the cylinder explode.


The electrical system
DISTRIBUTOR
IGNITION
COIL
SPARK PLUGS IGNITION
SWITCH
FUSE BOX
STARTER
SOLENOID
STARTER
BATTERY
GROUND
ALTERNATOR HORN
LIGHTING
CIRCUIT


70 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Ignition and Electrical Systems.
The Ignition Coil
Making power jump over the spark plug gap takes 40,000 or
more volts of electricity, but the battery supplies only 12 volts.
The ignition coil is the device that boosts the voltage. It has an
iron core surrounded by two sets of wire windings. Current
flows through the primary windings and generates a magnetic
field around the core. When the current stops flowing, the
magnetic field collapses. This makes high-voltage current flow
in the secondary windings.
Electronic Ignition
Most cars built since 1975 use some form of electric ignition to
break the current flow in the ignition coil’s primary windings.
Solid-state electronics controlled by the engine control unit turn
the current off and on as needed.
Ignition coils
transform
12 volts of
electricity into
40,000 to
50,000 volts.
Spark Plugs
For most car owners today, changing the
spark plugs in a vehicle has become a
thing of the past. However, it is still a
useful skill if you use anything with an
internal combustion engine, like a lawn
mower, dirt bike, or motorcycle.
A spark plug screws into a hole in
each cylinder head. The center electrode
(a metal tip that is a good conductor)
carries electricity, while the side electrode
is connected (grounded) to the engine. At
the bottom of the spark plug, the electrodes
are separated by a gap only a fraction of an
inch wide. Sparks must jump over this gap.
Arcing can make the electrodes wear
out so the gap between them widens.
Waste from combustion can also build up.
This is why you must replace spark plugs
from time to time. Using a spark plug
socket makes this task easy. Its rubber
insert prevents damage to the ceramic
part of the plug.
Spark plug construction
TERMINAL
PORCELAIN
INSULATOR
CENTER
ELECTRODE
GAP
SIDE ELECTRODE


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 71
.The Ignition and Electrical Systems
Changing a Spark Plug
Change spark plugs only when the
engine is cold. It is a good idea to
always replace spark plugs with the
same make and model. Follow these
steps to change a spark plug.
Step 1—Twist and pull the rubber
boot, not the spark plug wire, from
the spark plug.
Step 2—Clean around the spark
plug with a shop rag or brush.
Step 3—Using a spark-plug socket
on a socket wrench, remove the
spark plug from the engine by
turning the wrench counterclock-
wise. Using a feeler gauge, set
the spark plug gap the vehicle’s
manufacturer has specified.
Step 4—Hand-tighten the new spark
plug by turning it clockwise. Then,
tighten it with the socket wrench
using torque specifications of the
product to avoid stripping threads.
Step 5—Firmly press or twist the
boot in place.
When replacing multiple spark
plugs, change only one plug at a
time. This will reduce the risk that
a wire will get on the wrong plug.
1
3
4
5


72 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Ignition and Electrical Systems.
Engine Firing Order
Firing order is the sequence in which the spark plugs operate.
Each cylinder has a number. On most inline engines, the cylin-
der in front is number 1. On V-6 and V-8 designs, one side uses
even numbers (2, 4, 6, etc.) and the other side uses odd num-
bers (1, 3, 5, etc.). The firing order reduces unwanted vibration.
The illustration shows typical firing orders.
Other Electrical Systems
Cars and trucks use lots of electrical devices. Many of them
work only if the ignition switch is on. We will look at some of
the most important electrical systems.
The Starting System
The starter is an electric motor with gears at one end. When you
turn the key in the ignition it closes a solenoid relay, a circuit
that lets electricity flow to the starter and makes its gears engage
(connect with) the flywheel gears. Once the engine starts, the
ignition switch lets go, which opens the circuit and disengages
the gears.
Typical firing orders
➅
➄
➃
➂
➁
➀
➇ ➆
➅ ➄
➃ ➂
➁ ➀
➃
➂
➁
➀
4-CYLINDER: 1-3-4-2
6-CYLINDER: 1-5-3-6-
2-4
V-8 OR BOXER: 1-8-4-3-6-5-7-2


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 73
.The Ignition and Electrical Systems
The Charging System
The charging system uses an alternator to convert rotary
motion (driven by belts from the engine) into electricity, which
recharges the battery and drives various electrical components.
A voltage regulator controls the amount of recharging.
The Lighting System
The lighting system includes the interior overhead lights, instru-
ment lights, headlights, taillights, turn signals, warning lights,
hazard lights, and exterior lights. When you open a car door,
plunger-type switches close a circuit to the interior lights and
make them go on. When you apply the brakes, a switch under
the pedal closes a circuit to the brake light bulbs so they light up.
Accessories
Wires connect the battery to many other accessories, including
the sound system, heating and cooling systems, and (if the car
has them) power windows and power seats. All have separate
switches. In some cases (such as the sound system and the
heating and cooling systems), you must also turn the ignition
switch on to close the circuit to the battery.
A solenoid is a coil of wire that wraps around a metal
core. Electricity magnetizes the coil and makes the core
move, opening or closing an electrical circuit.


74 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Ignition and Electrical Systems.
The Battery
Like the batteries in a flashlight, a car battery stores electricity.
It has two terminals, or posts. One is marked negative (-) and
the other is marked positive (+). A cable connects the negative
terminal to the engine block, which acts as a ground. A second
cable connects the positive terminal to the car’s many electrical
devices. Current flows out of the positive terminal to the electri-
cal parts. It returns through the ground to the negative terminal.
So how does a battery store electricity? Each of its six cells
has a lead plate and a lead-dioxide plate, both of which are sur-
rounded by sulfuric acid. Chemical reactions between the metal
plates and the acid make about 2 volts of electricity. Because a
car battery has six cells, it generates 12 volts of electricity.
Battery Maintenance
Because most car batteries are
sealed, they never need water
added to them. If your battery
is of the type that needs water
added to its cells, check it
regularly. Unscrew the six
round caps on top and check
the fluid level in each cell. If
the fluid level is below the fill
mark, add water to fill.
About once a year, clean
the battery terminals with a wire brush and clean the top with
a solution of water and baking soda. Check the cables to make
sure they are tight on the terminals.
To ground the
cable, connect
it to the ground
or to another
conducting body,
such as a shiny,
unpainted metal
part of the car.
Try clamping the
cable to part of
the car’s frame.
Unlike flashlight batteries, lead-acid batteries can be
recharged by forcing electricity back into the positive
terminal. This changes electrical energy back into
chemical energy.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 75
.The Ignition and Electrical Systems
SIDE
TERMINAL
BOLT
RATCHET
SOCKET
PLIERS
POST
SQUEEZE-
TYPE CLAMP LUGS
WIRE BATTERY BRUSH
CLAMP
POST
CLAMP
WRENCH
NUT
Red clamps must always be connected to
positive (+) terminals, and black clamps
to negative (-) terminals. Reversing
this could cause significant component
damage. For safety, the negative cable
is always first off during removal and
last on during installation.
Always wear safety glasses when working
around the battery. Placing a fender pro-
tector on the vehicle will protect the paint
in the event of an acid spill.
Battery connections must be clean and tight.
WRENCH
RATCHET
PLIERS
POST
LUGS
CLAMP
WIRE BATTERY
BRUSH
SQUEEZE-
TYPE CLAMP
NUT
POST


76 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Ignition and Electrical Systems.
Using Jumper Cables to Start a Car
If you hear a clicking sound when you try to start your engine, or the
engine groans but does not start, the battery may be discharged. Often,
you can use jumper cables and a second car battery to start the car.
Here are the steps to jump-start a car.
Caution: Follow these instructions carefully to help avoid generating
sparks; these can be a fire hazard because there are combustible gases
around batteries. Wear gloves and eye protection throughout the process.
Step 1—Park the second car so the two batteries are close together but the
cars are not touching. Put both cars in park and turn off accessories.
Step 2—Hold the jumper cables so the clamps are not touching each other
or anything in either engine compartment.
Step 3—Clamp one end of the red cable to the positive (+) terminal of
the dead battery. Clamp the other end of the red cable to the positive (+)
terminal of the good battery.
Step 4—Clamp one end of the black cable to the negative (-) terminal of
the good battery. Clamp the other end of the black cable to an unpainted
metal surface of the dead engine, such as a bolt or bracket. Do not clamp it
to the negative terminal. Use a surface that is as far away from the battery
as possible.
Step 5—Double-check all connections and then start the second car. Let it
idle for a few minutes. It is ok to start the second car before Step 2.
Step 6—Start the dead car. Let both cars idle for a few minutes, and then
remove the jumper cables in the reverse of the order in which you connected
them. As before, do not let them touch each other or any other surfaces.
Step 7—The alternator should recharge the dead battery after 30 minutes
or so of driving. However, you may need to recharge it with a battery
charger to avoid overworking the alternator.
Self-contained, rechargeable power boosters also can jump-start a vehicle—
with less of a safety risk. When you use one of these units, take the same
precautions, wearing eye protection and gloves, and working slowly
and carefully.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 77
.The Ignition and Electrical Systems
Correct jumper cable connections
MAKE LAST CONNECTION, 4,
AWAY FROM BATTERY. BLACK (NEGATIVE)
GOOD BATTERY
WEAK BATTERY
RED (POSITIVE)
NEGATIVE POSITIVE
1 2
3
4
TOP-TERMINAL BATTERIES


78 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Ignition and Electrical Systems.
Checking a Vehicle’s Lights
Light bulbs in a car burn out just like the ones at home, and
you must replace them. You should check all the lights on your
vehicle from time to time to make sure they work properly.
Turn on the headlights, which will simultaneously light the
instrument lights and taillights. Check to see that each bulb is
glowing. Engage the high beams on the headlights and make
sure that both headlights’ high beams work. Have a friend step
on the brake pedal while you check to see that the brake lights
work. Have your friend start the engine, apply
the brakes, and shift into reverse while you
check the backup lights. Return the car
to park and turn off then engine, then
turn on the hazard light switch and
turn indicator. Make sure all the
lights flash.
Check the owner’s
manual to learn
how to turn on
the lights for your
particular vehicle.
Check the
owner’s manual
for instructions
on how to reach
and replace
the headlamps.
Never stand in
front of or behind
a car while the
engine is on.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 79
.The Ignition and Electrical Systems
Replacing Electrical Fuses
Fuses protect vehicle electrical systems. A fuse is the weak link
in an electrical circuit. When too much current is flowing, the
fuse “blows,” or cuts off power to protect other components
from damage.
The fuse panel usually is located under the instrument
panel, to the left of the steering wheel, but it might be in the
glove box or even in the trunk. Check the owner’s manual for
the location of the fuse panel on your vehicle.
Labels next to fuses or on the fuse panel’s cover tell you
which circuit goes with each fuse. If an electrical system or
accessory does not work, find the right fuse, pull it out, and
see if the silvery piece of metal inside is broken and burned,
which indicates that the fuse is blown. Replace the fuse with
a new one of the same type, either cartridge or blade, and the
same amperage rating—typically 10, 15, 20, or 25 amps.
Typical fuse panel





AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 81
.The Computer and Emission Control Systems
The Computer
and Emission
Control Systems
Cars today include 50 or more microprocessors—tiny computers
that control everything from the fuel-air ratio to the airbags.
They help reduce tailpipe emissions and make it easier for
technicians to find engine problems.
Before there were computers, engine systems worked
mechanically using linkages, levers, springs, and vacuum
devices. Even car radios had mechanical tuners. Electronic
control is faster, more precise, and more reliable.
The Electronic Control Unit
The electronic brain of the car is the engine control unit (ECU).
A little smaller than a merit badge pamphlet and about 2 inches
thick, the ECU typically is located beneath the instrument panel.
A large connector with up to 60 circuits connects it to the car’s
wiring harness.
The ECU receives input from dozens of sensors that
monitor various engine conditions, including temperature,
speed, and engine vacuum. Based on this information, the ECU
decides how to adjust the engine and sends an electrical signal
to an actuator, a device that converts the electrical signal into
mechanical action. For example, the actuator may tell a fuel
injector to spray fuel into the engine.


82 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Computer and Emission Control Systems.
On-Board Diagnostics
The on-board diagnostics (OBD) system helps technicians find
problems with the engine and other systems. When the ECU
data indicates a problem with the engine, it generates a fault
code, which is like an abbreviated error message. A technician
can look at this code to help pinpoint what is wrong.
Since the 1996 model year, manufacturers have used a
set of fault codes called the OBD-II specification. A typical
OBD-II fault code would be P0171. Here’s what that code
tells the technician:
• P stands for powertrain.
• 0 means it is a generic code. (This digit is always either 0 or
1; 1 means the fault code is specific to the manufacturer.)
• 1 means it is related to the emission management system.
• 71 tells you the particular problem. In this case, the system
is running too lean on bank 1 (the side of the engine with
cylinder No. 1).
Emission Control Systems
Almost every engine system has something to do with emission
control. However, most car-related pollution comes from three
sources: exhaust gases, evaporation, and crankcase gases.
Exhaust Gases
Exhaust gases are the result of fuel combustion and are expelled
through the tailpipe. The catalytic converter controls these
gases, using chemical elements like platinum, palladium, and
rhodium to turn nitrogen oxides, carbon monoxide, and carcino-
genic (cancer-causing) hydrocarbons into less harmful emissions
like oxygen, carbon dioxide, and water.
The catalytic converter
controls exhaust emissions.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 83
.The Computer and Emission Control Systems
Evaporative Emissions
Evaporative emissions occur when gasoline vapors evaporate
(escape into the air in the form of a gas). To control these
emissions, fuel-tank vapors pass through canisters of activated
carbon before going into the engine to burn.
A spring-loaded door on your car’s fuel-tank filler neck
keeps evaporative emissions from escaping when the tank is
open at the gas station. Since the 2000 model year, all cars
sold in the United States have had an onboard refueling vapor
recovery system, which captures vapors from the fuel tank
during refueling.
Crankcase Gases
Crankcase gases, also known as blow-by gases, are gases that
pass between the piston and cylinder wall and collect in the
bottom of the engine. The positive crankcase ventilation (PCV)
valve recycles these gases into the air cleaner or the intake mani-
fold, where they can join the air-fuel mixture and reburn.
On most engines, the PCV valve is located where the hose
enters the valve cover or intake manifold. Most manufacturers
recommend that you inspect the PCV valve at 30,000-mile inter-
vals. Pull the valve from the hose or grommet and shake it hard.
If you cannot hear the internal parts rattle, the valve is plugged
and should be replaced.


84 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Dashboard.
The Dashboard
A vehicle’s dashboard does more than keep passengers out of
the engine compartment. It also tells the driver what is happen-
ing in the engine and other important systems. At a glance, the
driver can find out how fast the car is moving, how far it has
gone, how much fuel it has left, and whether there are problems
with its electrical system, brakes, airbags, and other systems.
Most instrument panels are built into the dashboard, right
behind the steering wheel. Some vehicles have center-mounted
panels next to the steering wheel, while a few have head-up
displays—like those in fighter jets—that project information onto
the windshield. These displays let drivers check their speed or
navigation directions while keeping their eyes on the road.
Instrument panel design varies by vehicle. Some use
high-tech digital readouts, while others use simple needles
and gauges. All instrument panels must have the basic set of
gauges and indicators listed in the U.S. government’s Federal
Motor Vehicle Safety Standards. These standards also regulate
the look and color of most indicators. Red is for big problems
like overheating or brake failure. Yellow is for smaller problems
like underinflated tires. Blue and green indicators, such as
high-beam indicators, give status information only.
Many car manu-
facturers now offer
additional features
for safety and
convenience such
as in-dash navigation
systems, parking assist
systems, collision
avoidance systems,
and backup cameras.
A gauge measures
something,
like speed. An
indicator tells
you whether
a system is
working properly.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 85
.The Dashboard
To learn more about the instrument panel on the vehicle
you are working on, you will need to be able to start the engine
and have the owner’s manual at hand. Sit in the driver’s seat
and read through the part of the owner’s manual that describes
the instrument panel. Find out what each gauge or indicator
does and where it is.
If you are turning an ignition switch (some modern vehicles
have proximity keys and push-button starting), a few indicators
will come on for just a few seconds when you turn the switch
to the “on” position. Therefore, you may have to move the key
between the “on” and “off” position a few times (without start-
ing the engine) during this exercise.
The next few sections describe many of a vehicle’s gauges
and indicators. Because automotive technology is always chang-
ing, you may see others on your vehicle.
Back in the days of horse-drawn carriages, a dashboard was an
upturned board that kept mud from being dashed (splashed) onto
a carriage’s passengers.


TACHOMETER SPEEDOMETER
FUEL GAUGE
TEMPERATURE GAUGE
ODOMETER
CHARGING SYSTEM INDICATORLOW OIL PRESSURE INDICATOR
MIL


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 87
.The Dashboard
Common Vehicle Gauges
The following gauges are those most often found in passenger
vehicles. Put a check mark next to each item as you find it on
your vehicle. If it is not there, write N/A.
■■ Speedometer. This gauge shows how fast the vehicle
is going in miles per hour (MPH) and kilometers per
hour (KPH).
■■ Tachometer. This gauge shows how fast the engine
crankshaft is going in revolutions per minute (RPM).
■■ Fuel gauge. This gauge shows about how much fuel is in
the tank. (The amount it shows might not be exact.)
■■ Temperature gauge. This gauge shows the temperature of
the engine’s coolant. The pointer should stay in the middle
range during normal driving. In severe conditions, it may get
closer to the red zone. If it moves into the red zone, pull
over. Follow the owner’s manual instructions to check the
cooling system.
■■ Odometer. This gauge shows how far the vehicle has been
driven since it was built. (Note: It is illegal to disconnect,
reset, or change the odometer reading.)
■■ Trip odometer. This gauge shows how far the vehicle has
been driven since you last reset it. This tool lets you figure
out the distance between two points.


88 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
The Dashboard.
Other Critical System Gauges and Indicators
These gauges and indicators show you the status of several
of the vehicle’s important systems. Check them off as you
identify them.
■■ Malfunction indicator lamp (MIL). This indicator is often
called the “check engine” light. It comes on if one of the
engine’s emissions control systems may have a problem.
Even if the vehicle drives normally, the problem could
reduce fuel economy and cause increased emissions.
■■ Charging system indicator. This indicator tells you that the
battery is not charging properly. If it comes on, take the vehi-
cle to a qualified shop as soon as possible.
■■ Oil pressure gauge. This gauge shows the engine oil pres-
sure in pounds per square inch (PSI). The reading should
stay near the midpoint.
■■ Low oil pressure indicator. This indicator tells you that
engine oil pressure is low. When this light comes on, turn
off the engine as soon as you safely can and check the oil
level. If it is low, add oil to the proper level. If the level is
correct, there is a mechanical problem and you should have
the vehicle towed.
■■ Low fuel indicator. This light comes on to remind the driver
to refuel soon. A chime may also sound.
■■ Brake indicator. This light shows that the parking brake is
set or that there is a problem with the braking system. If the
parking brake is not set and the light comes on, the brake
fluid level is probably low.
■■ ABS (antilock braking system) indicator. This light tells
you that there is a problem with the antilock braking system.
The vehicle should still be able to brake even if the ABS does
not work.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 89
.The Dashboard
Other Gauges and Indicators
These gauges and indicators tell you about other vehicle
systems. Check them off as you find them.
■■ Seatbelt reminder indicator. This light reminds the driver
and passengers to buckle up. On some vehicles, the light will
remain on and a chime will sound every few seconds if the
driver and front passenger do not fasten their seatbelts.
■■ Headlight high beams indicator. This light tells you that
the headlights are on the bright (high-beam) setting.
■■ Airbag indicator. This light appears for a short time when
you start the car. If the indicator stays on or comes on during
driving, the vehicle should be taken in for service as soon as
possible because one of the vehicle’s airbag systems may
have a problem.
■■ Door/trunk/tailgate open. This light tells you that a door,
the trunk, or the tailgate is not closed tightly.
■■ Tire pressure monitoring system indicator. This light tells
you that one or more tires are underinflated by 25 percent or
more. It is a required indicator on all new vehicles, starting
with the 2008 model year.
What other indicators or gauges do you see on your
vehicle? List them below along with a brief description
of each.
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
___________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
_________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________
__________________________________________________


90 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Buying a Car.
Buying a Car
Owning a car is a big part of the American dream. A car is also
the first major purchase that many people make. To get the best
car for the best price, you have to do your homework. The
internet and printed pricing guides can help.
Finding and Buying a Car
Before you start actually looking at cars, think about what kind
of car you would like to buy. Should it be a four-door or two-
door sedan, a hatchback or minivan, a truck, or an SUV? Which
features do you think are important? Which ones are less impor-
tant to you? Perhaps you really want power steering or
air-conditioning, but you do not think you need a sunroof or
leather seats. How much money are you willing to spend? Keep
in mind that you will also need enough money to pay for taxes,
registration, insurance, gasoline, and maintenance.
Next, look at cars at local dealerships or from private sellers
that fit your needs. Take cars you like for a test drive. With your
parent or guardian’s permission, visit websites like cars.com to
read detailed reviews of the models you are considering.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 91
.Buying a Car
Once you have found a car you really like, have a mechanic
inspect it before you buy it. Many shops offer free courtesy
checks. You can also use the vehicle identification number
(VIN) to look up the individual vehicle’s history at websites like
carfax.com. If you find out that the car has been in a serious
accident, keep shopping. You should also avoid a car whose
title (the document that shows ownership) reflects that it was
rebuilt; cars with “rebuilt” titles have typically been sold as
salvage vehicles and then repaired.
Finally, bargain on a price for the car that is fair to both you
and the seller. Unlike prices on most other products, car prices
are usually negotiable. Printed price guides like the Kelley Blue
Book, and the websites that go with them, suggest prices for
thousands of used cars based on condition, options, mileage,
and other factors. Usually these prices range from the trade-in
price (what a car dealer would give you as a trade-in credit) to
the retail price (what a car dealer would charge for the car). You
should aim to pay a price in the middle.
New or Used?
When deciding whether to buy a new car or a used
car, you have several factors to weigh. Rely on your
common sense, and stick to your budget and what you
need from your car. New cars offer peace of mind in
that they should not require as much maintenance as
soon as a used car would, and a new car most likely
would be covered under a manufacturer’s warranty for
a few years. While they might not appear as appealing
as a new car, used cars can be just as reliable—and a
great deal less costly. Many used-car programs today
offer vehicles that have been through an intensive
inspection process and are guaranteed to be in good
shape. And depending on the age of the car, it might
still be covered under the manufacturer’s warranty.
Ultimately, the choice is up to you.


92 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Buying a Car.
Price guides are available online for both new and used cars, allowing you to compare
before you ever begin your search in person.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 93
.Buying a Car
Buying Insurance
The law says you must have liability insurance before operating
a motor vehicle. Other types of insurance are not required by
law but are a good idea to have. Here are some common kinds
of insurance coverage.
• Liability. Pays the other person when you hurt them or
damage their property
• Collision. Pays for repairs to your vehicle when you cause
an accident
• Comprehensive. Pays for damage to your vehicle that was
not caused by an accident, like damage caused by vandalism
or a fire
• Medical. Pays medical expenses for you and your passengers
after an accident
• Uninsured/underinsured motorist. Protects you if you are
hit by someone who does not have auto insurance or does
not have enough to pay for the damage caused
• Towing. Pays for towing if your car breaks down
• Rental car. Pays for a rental car for you to drive while your
car is being repaired after an accident
The cost of insurance will vary depending on many factors,
including your age, where you live, your driving record, and
the type of car you are insuring. The Insurance Institute for
Highway Safety estimates that insurance makes up 11 percent
of the cost of owning a car over five years, so be sure to first
check with your insurer on the costs of insuring the make and
model of the car before you buy.


Calculating Annual Totals to Produce Approximate Cost Per Mile
Expenses New Car Used Car New or
Used Car
Operating Costs
Cost of gas per 10,000 miles driven
(Cost per gallon of gas ÷ miles per gallon X 10,000)
Maintenance
Oil changes
Air, fuel filters
Tune-ups
Other
Tires
Rotation and balance
Wheel alignment
Ownership Costs
Insurance (Basic liability, collision, comprehensive, towing, rental car)
License, registration, taxes
Miscellaneous Costs
Car washes, cleaning supplies
Accessories
Total Driving Costs (Add all rows)
Divide total driving costs by total miles driven
Yearly Cost Per Mile
Note: If you will be financing your car, the monthly payment should also be figured in under ownership costs.





96 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Careers in Automotive Maintenance.
Careers in
Automotive Maintenance
The automobile was once a simple piece of machinery. Today, it
is a sophisticated mode of transportation. This change shows in
what we call people who take care of cars. Fifty years ago, they
were called mechanics. Today we call them technicians. To work
on today’s vehicles, knowing how to use wrenches and hand
tools is not near enough. Technicians also need to know how
to work with technologies like the engine control unit and on-
board diagnostics.
Position Descriptions
Automotive service has two major divisions: mechanical repairs,
which includes diagnosing and fixing vehicle systems, and body
repairs, which includes repairing and painting sheet metal and
other body materials.
Mechanical Repair Positions
There are four main kinds of mechanical repair positions.
• Apprentice is an entry-level position. Apprentices perform
minor repairs and help experienced technicians.
• General technician is the most common position. These tech-
nicians can perform almost any automotive service task.
• Specialty technicians spend most of their time working in one
area, such as air conditioning or automatic transmissions.
They usually need extra training and experience.
• Diagnostic technicians have advanced training on how to
work with computer systems and electronic components.
They find the cause of problems. They often work on
“problem vehicles” that other technicians cannot repair.


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 97
.Careers in Automotive Maintenance
Body Repair Positions
Body shops fix exterior damage to vehicles. There are three
basic positions. Duties may overlap, especially in a small shop.
• Estimators inspect a vehicle to determine the time, materials
required, and cost to make a repair. The estimate forms the
basis of the price the shop quotes to the customer for the
repairs needed.
• Collision repair technicians use hammers, frame machines,
and many other tools to put damaged fenders, doors, frames,
and body panels back to like-new condition.
• Painters mix paint to match a vehicle’s color, apply primer
sealers and surfacers to protect the surfaces from corrosion
before applying the paint and clear coat, and refinish the
surface to remove all signs of the repair.
Other Automotive Maintenance Positions
Large service organizations like dealerships employ a variety of
other people. They include service advisers, who greet custom-
ers and prepare repair orders; service managers, who run the
service department; parts managers, who are in charge of selling
replacement parts; and parts counter workers, who sell parts to
customers and fill requests from the service department.
Automotive service is exciting, challenging, and important
work. No two days, and no two vehicles, are just the same. As
cars become even more complex, the opportunities will keep
growing for people who want to put their hands—and their
brains—to work under the hood.
Technician Certification
Service organizations want to make sure they have the
best possible technicians working in their garages. Car
manufacturers offer training programs for technicians
who fix the cars they make. In addition, many techni-
cians receive certification from the National Institute
for Automotive Service Excellence. This group offers
certification in specific areas (brakes, engine repair, etc.)
that is good for five years. ASE certification can make
the difference when a would-be technician is applying
for a position.


98 AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE
Automotive Maintenance Resources.
Automotive
Maintenance Resources
Scouting Literature
Aviation, Electronics, Engineering,
Inventing, Model Design and Building,
Space Exploration, Traffic Safety,
Truck Transportation, and Welding
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Brand, Paul. How to Repair Your
Car (Motorbooks Workshop).
Motorbooks, 2006.
Dinkel, John. Road & Track Illustrated
Automotive Dictionary.
Bentley, 2000.
Editors of Popular Mechanics. Popular
Mechanics Complete Car Care
Manual, Hearst, 2008.
Gray, Michael E., and Linda E. Gray.
Auto Upkeep: Basic Car Care,
Maintenance, and Repair, 3rd ed.
Rolling Hills Publishing, 2012.
Jackson, Mary. Car Smarts: An
Easy-to-Use Guide to Understanding
Your Car and Communicating With
Your Mechanic. Avalon Travel
Publishing, 1998.
Kennedy, Michael. Career Opportunities
in the Automotive Industry. Facts on
File, 2005.
Krebs, Michelle: Careers Without College:
Cars. Peterson’s, 1999.
Newton, Tom. How Cars Work. Black
Apple Press, 1999.
Ramsey, Dan. The Complete Idiot’s
Guide to Car Care and Repair.
Alpha Books, 2003.
Sclar, Deanna. Auto Repair for Dummies.
IDG Books Worldwide, 2008.
Weber, Robert M. Opportunities in
Automotive Service Careers.
McGraw-Hill, 2001.
Organizations and Websites
Cars.com
cars.com
Edmunds
Telephone: 855-782-4711
edmunds.com


AUTOMOTIVE MAINTENANCE 99
.Automotive Maintenance Resources
Insurance Institute for Highway Safety
Telephone: 703-247-1500
iihs.org
Kelley Blue Book
kbb.com
NADA Guides
nada.org/nada/consumer-vehicle-values
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration
nhtsa.gov
National Institute for Automotive
Service Excellence
ase.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Bob
Rodriquez, Dan Baumhardt, and several
members of the ASE test development
staff for their assistance with this
Automotive Maintenance merit badge
pamphlet.
Thanks to the following for their
assistance with past pamphlets: George
Arrants, Automotive Youth Educational
Systems Inc.; Matt Brown, American
Honda Motor Co.; Charles Klasman,
BMW of North America; Robert Slovey,
General Motors Corp.; Joe Van Bodegon,
Mercedes-Benz USA; Chris Mason,
Raytheon Co.; and Robin Ferguson,
University of Missouri.
Scouting America is grateful to the
Birdville Independent School District
and the BISD’s Career and Technology
department for allowing us to use their
Shannon Center facility in Haltom City,
Texas, for a photo shoot. In particular,
thanks to Olin Harrington, an automo-
tive technology instructor there, for his
assistance with photography. We are
also thankful for the generosity of BP
Lubricants/Quaker State, which provided
supplies for a photo shoot.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Chrysler LLC/Dodge, courtesy—
page 63 (car)
Howstuffworks.com, courtesy—page 31
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
page 10
Mercedes-Benz USA, courtesy—page 73
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration—page 21 (Child Car
Safety logo)
Snap-on Inc., courtesy—page 12
Texas Department of Motor Vehicles,
courtesy—page 19
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 22,
27 (combustion chamber), 28
(inline-4), 41, and 64 (coolant)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 20–21, 27 (pistons, bicycle),
28, 29 (four-stroke cycle), 30, 32, 36,
36, 38 (treads and wheels, wheel
design), 39 (tire design, wear
indicator), 41, 42, 43 (front and
side views), 45 (tire wear patterns,
alignment), 46, 50, 51 (air-fuel
ratios, pressure), 53, 56, 58, 63,
65, 67, 69, 70, 75, and 77


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.