CAMPING


CAMPING
Scouting America
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
The Camping merit badge challenges Scouts mentally and
physically. Camping helps Scouting America deliver the promise
of outdoor adventure to youth in Scouts BSA. At all times that
Scouts participate in a Scouting America activity, they must
have the proper supervision. By following the guidelines under
“III. Camping” in Scouting America’s Guide to Safe Scouting,
unit leaders can help ensure the well-being of Scouts under
their supervision. Those guidelines are discussed here briefly.
Wilderness camping. Have a plan to help minimize risks and
manage a crisis should one occur. Involve Scouts and Scouters
in this process so that they all know of and know how to avoid
potential dangers. Camping takes proper planning, leadership,
and good judgment.
Trail safety. Stay alert; take care in everything that is done
on the trail, and plan activities within the group’s ability and
maturity level. Alert youth members to the dangers of unusual
environment with proper instruction on fire safety, orienteering,
and safe travel. On the trail, instruct group members to stay
together, and avoid loose rocks and dangerous ledges, cliffs,
and areas where a fall might occur. When Scouts understand
the reason for rules of safety, they more willingly abide by
those rules.
It is strongly recommended that at least one person in the
group be currently trained in first aid through the American Red
Cross or any recognized agency.
Beware of lightning. During lightning storms, avoid the sum-
mits of mountains, crests of ridges, slopes above timberline,
and large meadows. If you see a storm approaching, quickly
descend to a lower elevation, away from the direction of the
approaching storm. Instruct Scouts to squat down and keep
35866
ISBN 978-0-8395-0121-3
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


CAMPING 3
their heads low. Avoid isolated trees and trees much taller than
adjacent trees; and water, metal objects, and other substances
that will conduct electricity over long distances.
If the threat of lightning strikes is great, group members
should spread out at least 100 feet apart and squat with feet
close together. Remove backpacks with either external or inter-
nal metal frames. In tents, stay away from metal poles.
Treat all drinking water. Serious illness can result from drink-
ing or cooking with untreated water. Treat all water obtained
along the trail, or carry water from home.
Scouting America property smart. Remember the three C’s:
care, courtesy, and cleanliness. Follow these guidelines:
1. In advance, obtain permission from landowners.
2. When visiting public lands, obtain a permit in advance from
the land management agency.
3. Park only in designated areas.
4. If you must mark a trail, bring small signs that can be
placed as the group enters and removed upon leaving.
5. Obtain permission to cross private property, and always
leave gates exactly as you found them.
6. Treat the landowner’s livestock and other animals
with respect.
7. Keep noise to a minimum (especially at night), and follow
the rules on building fires in camp.
8. Practice the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the
Outdoor Code.
9. Thank the owner as you leave, or send a thank-you note.


4 CAMPING
10. When obtaining permission to enter a property, never
underestimate your departure time, and if you specify an
exit time, leave at that time.
11. Do not repeatedly frequent the same sites; limit camping in
the backcountry at one location to no more than three days.
12. Clean up and remove trash, and whenever possible, repair
damage left by inconsiderate visitors.
Hantavirus. This deadly airborne virus is spread through con-
tact with the urine and feces of infected rodents. Symptoms
include fever, chills, muscle aches, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea,
abdominal pain, and a dry, nonproductive cough. If you suspect
someone has been infected, seek medical treatment immediately.
Rabies prevention. Remind Scouts to steer clear of wild animals
and of domestic animals that they do not know. If someone is
scratched or bitten by a potentially rabid animal, wash the
wound thoroughly with soap and water. Immediately seek med-
ical attention. Get a description of the animal, and notify local
animal control officials, police, or board of health.


CAMPING 5
The guidelines mentioned here are discussed in
greater detail in the Guide to Safe Scouting, with which
all unit leaders should be familiar. Unit leaders may
want to use the following Scouting America publications to
help make campouts safer and more enjoyable.
• Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys/Scouts BSA Handbook
for Girls—sections on orienteering, outdoor essentials,
clothing and layering, water treatment, menus, camp
cooking, and first-aid preparedness
• Fieldbook—sections on organizing and planning,
backcountry basics, environmental protection,
safety and survival, outdoor adventuring, and nature
• Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the Outdoor Code—
conservation, environmental ethics
• Belay On—climbing and rappelling
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R G I R L S
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R B O Y S


6 CAMPING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Camping or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


CAMPING 7


8 CAMPING


CAMPING 9





CAMPING 11
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Preparation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Gearing Up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Making Camp, Breaking Camp . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Giving Full Meaning to Camping . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Camping Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62


12 CAMPING
Introduction.
Introduction
Camping! For nearly a hundred years, Scouts have been camp-
ing in open country. They have felt the sun on their backs and
the wind in their faces. When storms broke overhead, they
have used their skills to stay dry and warm. When a morning
dawned brisk and clear, they were sure there was no better
way to live.
Robert Baden-Powell
knew that, as well. When he
founded the Scouting move-
ment in the early 1900s, he
encouraged every Scout to
learn the art of living out-of-
doors. He believed young
people able to take care of
themselves while camping
would have the confidence
to meet other challenges, too.
Times are different now.
The wonders of modern tech-
nology have shaped for us a
way of life that Baden-Powell
would barely recognize. But
something that has not
changed is the joy of going
camping. Scouts everywhere
are still eager to head out for
a night under the stars. They
look forward to camping as part of longer adventures—journeys
by watercraft, on foot, or saddled up to ride. When you go
camping with your fellow Scouts, you have the time of your life
working, playing, learning together, and enjoying one of the
greatest Scouting traditions.


CAMPING 13
.Introduction
What Is Camping?
When the naturalist John Muir began hiking into the high
mountains of the Sierra Nevada in the 1870s, he carried little
more than bread or crackers, some grain meal, and a bit of
sugar and tea. He had several cans he could use as pots. At
night he rolled up in a couple of blankets and built a fire to
keep warm. With his light load, Muir ranged far and wide
among the rugged California peaks.
Today, members of a Scout troop in a small Midwestern
town hike through farm fields and along dusty roads to a patch
of woods where they settle in for the night. Scouts from a com-
munity in the mountains climb a steep trail to an alpine lake,
their backpacks filled with just the right gear for a wilderness
trek. A Scout patrol makes itself comfortable for an exciting week
of long-term camping at a favorite council camp. On foot, in
canoes, rafts, and sailboats, or with strings of pack animals,
expeditions of older Scouts set off on challenging itineraries at
Scouting America high-adventure bases across the country. And
every four or five years, Scouts by the thousands gather for the
national Scout jamboree. They pitch their tents in circles or rows,
cook their own meals, and spend their days building friendships
and sampling a wide range of Scouting skills and events.
John Muir was camping. So are all of these Scouts.
Camping is such a wide-open activity that it has room for
everyone, from 10 backpackers moving lightly through a
wilderness area to 10,000 Scouts pitching their tents in
campsites reachable by a road.
Scouts setting off on camping trips share an eagerness
to live simply and well, and to put the values of Scouting
in motion by doing all they can to protect the
environment they are privileged to enjoy.





CAMPING 15
.Preparation
Preparation
Of all that you can take with you on a camping trip, the most
important thing is knowledge. Plan ahead and you can be fairly
sure that you will have everything you need—both in your pack
and in your head—to make a camping trip a success. Start by
thinking about how you will manage risk.
Risk Management
Risk management is so much a part of camping that we often
don’t notice we are doing it. When we fill bottles with water
from streams and lakes, we deal with the potential risk of
parasites by treating the water with a filter, boiling it, or using
chemical treatment. When we share the backcountry with
bears, we protect them and ourselves by hanging our food out
of their reach, eliminating odors from our sleeping areas, and
keeping campsites spotless. When foul weather blows in, routes
become uncomfortably exposed, streams swell, or snow loads
make avalanches a possibility, we make decisions that keep
risks at acceptable levels.
Perhaps the greatest risk to be managed in the backcountry
is also one of its real attractions—the simple matter of distance.
The farther you travel from clinics, physicians, and rescue squads,
the more you must rely upon yourself and your companions to
maintain your safety. Of course, the best response to risk is
to avoid it. That requires good planning, leadership, and an
awareness of your surroundings so that you can make wise
decisions every step of the way.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which means “to lessen
in force or intensity” and “to make less severe.” By taking precautions
to manage risk and first aid, you can be prepared to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any camping hazard.


16 CAMPING
Preparation.
The more responsibility every Scout takes for personal
health and safety, the more each of you can contribute to a
successful camping trip. You also will be in a stronger position
to provide assistance if an emergency does arise. Here are some
ways you can increase your role in risk management:
• Stay in good physical shape so you are ready for the
demands of camping.
• Know where you are going and what to expect.
• Adjust clothing layers to match changing conditions.
• Drink plenty of water.
• Protect yourself from exposure to the sun, to biting insects,
and to poisonous plants.
• Take care of your gear.
Lastly, let others know when you are having difficulties or
are aware of a concern that might affect you or the group.
Stopping for a few moments to deal with a hot spot on a heel can
help avoid bringing the group to a long halt later in the day when
blisters break out. Speaking up about changes you notice in the
weather or asking questions you have about whether a campsite
is appropriate can help everyone make the best decisions.
First-Aid Preparedness
Managing risk includes being prepared to handle emergencies.
Camping can take you far from urban areas where emergency
medical care is nearby. In the field, your group might need to
care for an injured or ill person for a few hours or even a day
or more until help arrives. That requires thinking about first aid
in different ways than you would when you are in a city.
Completing the first-aid requirements for the Tenderfoot,
Second Class, and First Class Scout ranks can help you prepare
to deal with illnesses and injuries that could arise while you are
camping. So can earning the First Aid merit badge. The current
editions of the Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys, Scouts BSA
Handbook for Girls, and the Fieldbook include descriptions of
the symptoms and treatment of hypothermia, heatstroke, heat
exhaustion, frostbite, dehydration, sunburn, insect stings, tick
bites, snakebite, and blisters. In addition, familiarize yourself
with the symptoms, prevention, and treatment of altitude
sickness, hyperventilation, asthma, and food allergies.


CAMPING 17
.Preparation
Altitude Sickness
Camping may take you to high places where altitude sickness
(also known as AMS, or acute mountain sickness) can be a
concern. Fortunately, altitude sickness is seldom a problem for
people at elevations of less than 8,000 feet above sea level.
Going to a place that is higher than you are accustomed
may leave you short of breath because the atmosphere around
you becomes thinner and contains less oxygen. Within a few
days your body will acclimate to higher altitudes by producing
extra red blood cells to carry more oxygen to your tissues and
organs, and you should feel fine.
Taking steps to help prevent altitude sickness is far better
than suffering from it during a camping trip. The following sug-
gestions can make your alpine adventures more comfortable
and more fun, too.
• Drink plenty of fluids. As a rule, take in enough water so
that your urine remains clear rather than dark yellow.
• Give your body time to acclimate gradually as you go higher.
Spend a few days at 5,000 to 7,000 feet and then a few more
at 8,000 to 10,000 feet.
• “Climb high, sleep low.” Use this mountaineer’s trick for
acclimating by hiking upward during the day and then
descending to a lower camp for a good night’s rest.
Watch for any or all of these symptoms
of altitude sickness: headache, nausea,
unusual tiredness, loss of motivation.
Going down a few thousand feet in
elevation will almost always relieve
these symptoms. Rest, fluids, and
food may also help. If symptoms
persist or worsen, seek
medical assistance.
Altitude Sickness Symptoms
and Treatment


18 CAMPING
Preparation.
Hypothermia
The symptoms of altitude sickness also can be warning signs of
hypothermia. Begin treatment for hypothermia by making sure
that the person is warm, is wearing dry clothing, is sheltered
from the wind and chilly or wet weather, and has had enough
to eat and drink. If the person does not rapidly improve and the
elevation is above 8,000 feet, treat for altitude sickness as well.
Hyperventilation
Stress and anxiety about outdoor adventures can sometimes
cause a person to suffer from hyperventilation—quick, shallow
breathing that can upset the balance of oxygen and carbon
dioxide in the body. Someone experiencing hyperventilation
can become light-headed, faint, and sometimes feel tingling or
numbness in the fingers and toes.
Treating Hyperventilation. The symptoms of hyperventilation
usually will go away if the person relaxes and breathes more
slowly. Removing any cause of anxiety is important, too, either
by moving to a different location or by talking through the situ-
ation. Extensive or repeated episodes of hyperventilation might
be signs of other medical concerns and should be checked out
by a physician.
Managing Asthma and
Allergic Reactions
Asthma and allergies are seldom barriers for Scouts to
participate fully in troop campouts. For example, a troop
with a Scout who is severely allergic to peanuts can
operate as a peanut-free zone during meetings and
camping trips. That will create a safe environment for all
and will show the values of Scouting in action by making
opportunities for adventures available to everyone.
Scouts who have asthma or allergies to certain
foods, bee stings, or other agents must let group lead-
ers know ahead of time the exact nature of their situa-
tion and how they should be treated for an asthma
attack or an allergic reaction. They also should consult
with their physicians to prepare themselves for outdoor
activities with strategies and treatment kits, and should
share that information with their group leaders.


.Preparation
Leave No Trace and the Outdoor Code
From the Appalachians to the Cascades, and from the Gulf
Coast to the Great Lakes, America is blessed with magnificent
open country. As a camper, you will have many chances to
enjoy America’s expanses, but with that privilege comes a great
responsibility to cause no harm to the environment.
Scouting America has adopted the Leave No Trace Seven
Principles and the Outdoor Code to help Scouts enjoy their
experience to the fullest, but in ways that protect the areas
where they travel. The rewards of leaving no trace are well
worth learning new skills. The future of unspoiled territory—
and the continuing opportunity to visit it depends in large part
on how responsibly Scouts today conduct themselves.
In order to write a personal and group plan for implement-
ing these principles on a camping trip, become familiar with the
Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the Outdoor Code.
The Leave No Trace Seven Principles
1. Plan ahead and prepare.
• Know the regulations and special concerns for the area
you’ll visit.
• Prepare for extreme weather, hazards, and emergencies.
• Schedule your trip to avoid times of high use.
• Visit in small groups when possible. Consider splitting
larger groups into smaller groups.
• Repackage food to minimize waste.
• Use a map and compass to eliminate the use of marking
paint, rock cairns, or flagging.
2. Travel and camp on durable surfaces.
• Durable surfaces include established trails and campsites,
rock, gravel, dry grasses, or snow.
• Protect areas near water by camping at least 200 feet from
lakes and streams.
• Good campsites are found, not made. Altering a site is
not necessary.
• In popular areas, use existing trails and campsites. Walk
single file in the middle of the trail, even when it is wet
or muddy. Keep campsites small. Focus activity in areas
where vegetation is absent. In pristine areas, spread out to
CAMPING 19


20 CAMPING
Preparation.
prevent the creation of campsites and trails. Avoid places
where impacts are just beginning.
3. Dispose of waste properly (pack it in, pack it out).
• Pack it in, pack it out. Inspect your campsite and rest areas
for trash or spilled foods. Pack out all trash, leftover food,
and litter.
• Deposit solid human waste in catholes dug 6 to 8 inches
deep at least 200 feet from water, camp, and trails. Cover
and disguise the cathole when finished.
• Where necessary, pack out toilet paper and hygiene products.
• To wash yourself or your dishes, carry water 200 feet away
from streams or lakes and use small amounts of biodegrad-
able soap. Scatter strained dishwater.
4. Leave what you find.
• Preserve the past; examine, but do not touch, cultural or
historic structures and artifacts.
• Leave rocks, plants, and other natural objects as you
find them.
• Do not build structures or furniture, or dig trenches.
5. Minimize campfire impacts.
• Campfires can cause lasting impacts to the backcountry.
Use a lightweight stove for cooking and enjoy a candle lantern
for light.
• Where fires are permitted, use established fire rings, fire pans,
or mound fires.
• Keep fires small. Only use sticks from the ground that can be
broken by hand.
• Burn all wood and coals to ash, put out campfires completely,
then scatter cool ashes.
6. Respect wildlife.
• Observe wildlife from a distance. Do not approach them.
• Never feed animals. Feeding them damages their health, alters
natural behaviors, and exposes them to predators and
other dangers.


CAMPING 21
.Preparation
• Protect wildlife and your food by storing rations and
trash securely.
• Avoid wildlife during sensitive times: mating, nesting,
raising young, and enduring winter.
7. Be considerate of other visitors.
• Respect other visitors’ privacy and property.
• Be courteous. Yield to other users on the trail.
• Camp away from trails and other visitors.
• Let nature’s sounds prevail. Keep the noise down.
The Outdoor Code
The Outdoor Code of Scouting America reminds Scouts
of the importance of caring for the environment. The
code’s ideals have special meaning whenever you are
camping, hiking, or taking part in other outdoor events.
Outdoor Code
As an American, I will do my best to—
Be clean in my outdoor manners,
Be careful with fire,
Be considerate in the outdoors, and
Be conservation-minded.


22 CAMPING
Preparation.
Where to Camp
With the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the Outdoor
Code in mind, consider where you want to camp. Your choice
of a campsite depends upon what you want to do and see,
how much time you have, and the kind of camping that
appeals to you.
Frontcountry Camping
Frontcountry sites are those that can easily be reached by
automobile, public transit, or bicycle. Frontcountry camping
locations include campgrounds in national, state, and local
parks and forests; property owned by Scouting America; and,
with permission, many private lands. Developed campgrounds
may have designated tent sites and fireplaces, public restrooms,
and sources of clean drinking water.
Because these sites are usually near roads, Scouts taking
part in frontcountry camping often can carry more gear and
provisions than they might on trips that require backpacking.
Meals can include fresh ingredients and involve more elaborate
preparation, such as baking in Dutch ovens.
Frontcountry camping is ideal for Scouts learning the basics
of living out-of-doors. With several frontcountry campouts under
their belts, they will have a much better idea of what to carry
when they travel farther from the road, and how to manage
camps at more remote destinations.
Concentrate camp activity in high-use areas such as this
frontcountry campsite.


CAMPING 23
.Preparation
Backcountry Camping
The nature of a camping trip changes dramatically when
you leave the road behind and venture into the backcountry.
Everything you need for a night or more must be carried in
a pack on your back, stowed in duffels tied into a canoe, or
loaded onto a horse, burro, or mule. As you leave civilization
behind, a great world of possibilities and responsibilities opens
before you.
Backcountry camping can take you to places that few
people ever reach. You can spend time near remote lakes,
in deep forests, and in desert terrain. Best of all, you can rely
on your own skill and determination to make the most of
living for a while beyond the usual bounds of civilization.
Scouting America High-Adventure Bases
Scouting America high-adventure bases feature backcountry
camping adventures. Designed for older Scouts and Venturers,
each high-adventure base of Scouting America’s National
Council offers the training, equipment, and support you need to
set out on wilderness treks that will challenge your skills,
strength, and willpower.
Scouts at Philmont Scout Ranch can embark on backpack-
ing treks into the high country of northern New Mexico.
Expeditions from the bases of the Northern Tier National High
Adventure Program paddle canoes along the lakes and rivers of
the Boundary Waters of northern Minnesota and southern
Ontario and Manitoba in Canada. Headquartered in the Florida
Keys, the Florida National High Adventure Sea Base is the start-
ing point for oceangoing expeditions that include camping on
the islands and distant coastlines of the Keys and the Bahamas.
Activities at the Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve
in West Virginia range from rafting, kayaking, climbing, and
zip-lining to ropes courses, shooting sports, mountain
biking, skateboarding, and BMX.
Scouting America Summer Camp
A highlight of the year for many Scout troops is a week
at a Scouting America summer camp. It is rare for a
Scout to come home without having gained more
knowledge about living in the out-of-doors and great
enthusiasm for doing more of it as soon as possible.
Many local
councils have
their own
high-adventure
bases. Among the
activities they may
offer older Scouts
are backpacking,
camping, rock
climbing, canoeing,
and river rafting.
Check with your
local council
for information
about programs
in your area.


24 CAMPING
Preparation.
Trip Plan
Wherever you decide to camp, you
will need to prepare a written trip
plan. Well before your departure,
share the plan with your Scout
leaders and parents or guardian.
They may have suggestions that
will make your time in the out-
doors even better. A trip plan
also will let the leaders know
where you will be and will
enable them to provide support
if it is needed.
Include the following
information in your trip plan:
• Where you are going
• From where and when you
will depart
• How you will reach the camp
• What you will be doing
• Who is going along
• When you will return
• When and how you will obtain permits or permission
required by land management agencies or landowners of
the places you wish to travel and camp
• A brief emergency response plan that includes the location
and telephone number of the clinic or hospital closest to
your camp and route of travel, the phone number of the
local emergency response authority (in most areas, 911),
and the name of the person in your group who will take
charge in an emergency.
Scout troops and patrols sometimes attach gear lists, menus,
and duty rosters to their trip plans. With all the paperwork
together, patrol leaders can more easily assign to various Scouts
the tasks of gathering equipment, shopping for food, and taking
care of the other details of preparing for a camping trip.


CAMPING 25
.Preparation
Menus
Camping builds big appetites. With planning and practice, you
can match that hunger with mouth-watering meals sure to keep
you and your crew going strong all day.
When the key activities of an adventure take place away
from your campsite—rappelling, for example, or conservation
projects, float trips, canoeing, or wildlife photography—make
meal preparation quick and easy so that you can get back to
the action as soon as possible. On more leisurely campouts,
cooking can take center stage. In stormy weather, there is no
better way to pass the time than firing up the camp stove and
fixing something good to eat.
Dried/Dehydrated Foods
Much of the weight of many foods is water. Remove it,
and the result is a selection of lightweight ingredients
just right for campers. Most grocery stores carry pow-
dered milk, instant cocoa, dehydrated potatoes and
other vegetables, soup mixes, and many other dried
foods. Some camping stores sell entire camp meals
that require only the addition of boiling water.


26 CAMPING
Preparation.
Keep these suggestions in mind as you plan meals for a
camping trip:
• Select foods that will not spoil. In the frontcountry, you may
be able to bring fresh fruits and vegetables, and keep meat
and dairy products safe in a cooler with ice. For backcountry
treks, depend more upon grains, pastas, and dehydrated or
dried ingredients.
• When you camp in the frontcountry or travel by watercraft
or with pack animals, the weight of your food may not be a
critical factor. Besides taking items that are fresh or canned,
you might be able to include additional cooking gear, too—
a Dutch oven for stews and baking desserts, for example, or
a griddle for a big breakfast of flapjacks, bacon, and eggs.
• Trim the weight of your backpack by eliminating water from
your provisions. Grains, pastas, cereals, and dried or dehy-
drated fruits, vegetables, soup mixes, and sauces provide
plenty of punch per pound.
• Repackage food in resealable plastic bags to reduce clutter
and weight. On a piece of tape attached to each bag,
write the contents of the bag and the meal for which it
will be used.
Cook Safely!
The first item involved in safe cooking is, of course, the food. Meats and
dairy foods must be kept cold during storage, and once meat is removed
from its protective wrapper, the cook must take care to keep it separate
from other food items. Because bacteria can grow in meat, the meat
must be cooked thoroughly as
soon as it is no longer kept
cold. Likewise, any uneaten,
cooked meat must be properly
stored and kept cold to
eliminate the risk of growing
bacteria. (For more information
on protecting food from
contamination, see the Cooking
merit badge pamphlet.)


CAMPING 27
.Preparation
Menu and Recipe Ideas
Once you know how many meals you need, write down
what you want to prepare and eat for each of those
meals. The menus and recipes here will give you some
ideas. Other ideas might come from your parents, other
Scouts in your patrol, your Scouts BSA handbook, the
Fieldbook, the Cooking merit badge pamphlet, and
Camp Cookery for Small Groups.
SAMPLE MENUS
Trail breakfast: instant hot cereal, mixed dried
fruits, cocoa
Camp breakfast: pancakes, apple, milk or orange juice
RECIPE FOR INSTANT PANCAKES
• Pancake mix (“complete” variety that needs
only water)
• Large resealable bag
Before leaving for camp, measure the necessary
amount of pancake mix in a plastic bag. On the bag,
write how much water to add. At camp, add water,
seal the bag, knead to mix, and pour in small dollops
from the bag onto the hot griddle. Watch the pancakes
closely. When the small bubbles at the edges of the
pancake begin to burst, turn the pancakes. Continue
until you have as many pancakes as needed. Save
leftover pancake batter by carefully resealing the bag
for later use (and placing it in a cooler).
Trail lunch: peanut butter and jelly sandwich, carrot
sticks, chocolate pudding, juice (canned or boxed)
Camp lunch: hot dogs with condiments (pickle,
relish, mustard, ketchup) pork ‘n’ beans, sliced
pears, chocolate milk
Camp lunch: tomato soup, grilled ham and cheese
sandwich with pickles on the side, corn chips,
apple juice


28 CAMPING
Preparation.
Trail dinner: instant chicken and rice soup, heated sliced
beef on wheat rolls, carrot sticks, milk
Camp dinner: black bean soup, Texas hash, lettuce and
tomato salad, fried bananas, milk
RECIPE FOR TEXAS HASH
1 tablespoon cooking oil
1 pound ground meat
1 large onion, chopped
1 medium bell pepper, chopped
Garlic powder, to taste
1 8-ounce can stewed tomatoes
1 teaspoon chili powder
1 cup cooked rice
Salt, pepper to taste
Grated Monterey Jack or cheddar cheese, optional
In a Dutch oven, heat oil over the campfire or stove and
brown the meat, stirring to break up chunks. Set meat
aside on a plate. Add onion, bell pepper, and garlic
powder to pan. Cook just until tender. Add tomatoes,
tomato sauce, meat, and chili powder; mix well. Add
rice, season to taste. Bake until hot, 20 to 25 minutes.
Sprinkle grated cheese on top during the last five
minutes of baking.
Duty Roster
Cooperation keeps a camp running smoothly. So does having
one or two people in charge of each essential activity. A duty
roster lists the work that needs to be done and assigns tasks to
each member of a group. During long-term camping, Scouts
can switch chores each day after lunch. On overnight outings,
each Scout can perform one duty, then take on a different
responsibility for the next campout.


CAMPING 29
.Preparation
A typical duty roster might break camp tasks into these tasks:
• Water and stoves. Maintain the water supply for cooking
and cleanup. Find a safe place for fueling and using stoves,
and have them ready to light before the cooks need them.
• Cooking. Assemble ingredients and follow recipes to pre-
pare and serve meals. Have wash water heating on the stove
before serving meals.
• Cleanup. Set out wash and rinse water, oversee the washing
of group cooking gear, stow pots and utensils, and dispose
of garbage. (For more on washing dishes in camp, see the
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys, the Scouts BSA Handbook for
Girls, and the Fieldbook.)
• Food storage. Maintain a bear line or other food storage
system to protect provisions from animals and weather.
Secure all food items at night and whenever camp will be
left unattended.
Many groups also develop a list of assignments to be completed
before a camping trip begins. Duties may include:
• Assembling crew equipment
• Developing menus, shopping for food, and
repackaging provisions
• Getting maps and planning routes
• Securing permits or other forms of permission


30 CAMPING
Gearing Up.
Gearing Up
Each outdoor adventure is different, and the equipment you
take may change from one camping trip to the next. For times
when you want to travel light and move quickly through the
backcountry, pack exactly what is required for safety and
comfort, but not an ounce more. On other campouts, especially
those requiring little or no foot travel to reach the site, you may
want to add extras to enhance the pleasure of your time in the
out-of-doors.
Personal Gear
Use the following checklists as reminders of the gear and cloth-
ing you and your group may want to pack for a camping trip.
Beyond the outdoor essentials, you might not need every item
every time. By considering everything on each list, though, you
can decide whether something will be useful, and you will be
less likely to forget what could turn out to be an important piece
of clothing or equipment for the trip you are about to begin.


CAMPING 31
.Gearing Up
Scout Basic Essentials
Here are essential items you will need when you are
in the outdoors.
Pocketknife. Cut a cord, trim a bandage, slice
some cheese, tighten a screw on a camp stove—a
pocketknife is the all-purpose tool for the out-of-doors.
First-aid kit. Carrying a few first-aid items in a self-
sealing plastic bag will allow you to treat scratches,
blisters, and other minor injuries, and to provide initial
care if more serious emergencies arise.
Extra clothing and rain gear. Weather conditions in the
outdoors can change quickly. Have the clothing you
need to deal with extremes of weather—heat, cold,
and storm.
Water bottle. Take along at least a 1-quart bottle filled
with water. On long hikes, on hot days, in arid regions,
and at high elevations, carry two bottles or more. While
heat and humidity can make you more thirsty, it is
important to drink plenty of fluids in cold weather, too.
Flashlight. A flashlight will help you set up camp in
the dark or find your way home after the sun has
gone down. Carry spare batteries and an extra bulb.
Trail food. You’ll burn a lot of energy in the outdoors.
A stash of nuts, raisins, and dried fruits will help keep
you going, especially if a trip lasts longer than expected.
Matches and fire starters. Camp without relying on
an open fire, but be prepared to build one in an
emergency by carrying several fire starters that are
reliable, durable, and protected from the elements.
Sun protection. Sunburn is a common injury in
the outdoors. Repeated burns can cause long-term
damage and skin cancer. Wear sunscreen with an
SPF of at least 30.
Map and compass. Use them to find your way through
unfamiliar terrain, when visibility is poor, and where
expected trail signs are missing.


32 CAMPING
Gearing Up.
Carry your outdoor essentials on every Scout outing.
When you want to camp out under the stars, add
personal and group overnight gear.
Personal Overnight Camping Gear
n Clothing for the season (see box for warm-
and cold-weather camping)
n Backpack
n Rain cover for backpack
n Sleeping bag, or two or three blankets
n Ground cloth and pad
n Eating kit: spoon, plate, bowl, cup
n Cleanup kit: soap, toothbrush, toothpaste, dental
floss, comb, washcloth, towel
n Personal extras (optional): watch, camera and film,
notebook, pencil or pen, sunglasses, small musical
instrument, swimsuit, gloves
Group Overnight Camping Gear
n Tents with poles, stakes, ground cloths, and lines
n Dining fly
n Nylon cord, 50 feet
n Backpacking stoves and fuel
n Cook kit: pots and pans, spatula, large spoon and/or
ladle, plastic sheets (two 4-by-4-foot), matches and/or
butane lighters in waterproof containers
n Cleanup kit: sponge or dishcloth, biodegradable soap,
sanitizing rinse agent (bleach), scouring pads (no-soap
type), plastic trash bags, toilet paper in plastic bag
n Repair kit: thread, needles, safety pins
n Group extras (optional): hot-pot tongs, camp shovel,
plastic water container, washbasin, grill, pot rods,
patrol flag, small U.S. flag, ax, camp saw


CAMPING 33
.Gearing Up
Clothing Checklist
For Warm-Weather Camping:
n T-shirt or short-sleeved shirt
(lightweight)
n Hiking shorts
n Underwear
n Socks
n Long-sleeved shirt
(lightweight)
n Long pants (lightweight)
n Sweater or warm jacket
n Brimmed hat
n Bandannas
n Rain gear
For Cold-Weather Camping:
n Long-sleeved shirt
n Long pants (fleece or wool)
n Sweater (fleece or wool)
n Long underwear
(polypropylene)
n Socks (wool or synthetic blend)
n Warm hooded parka or jacket
n Stocking hat (fleece or wool)
n Mittens or gloves (fleece or
wool) with water-resistant shells
n Wool scarf
n Rain gear
Layering
For the most comfort in the outdoors with the least weight in
your pack, use the layering system. Choose layers of clothing
that, when combined, will meet the most extreme weather you
expect to encounter. On a chilly autumn day, for example, you
might set out from the trailhead wearing long pants, a wool
shirt, a fleece sweater, mittens, and a stocking hat. As you hike,
the effort will cause your body to generate heat. Peel off the
sweater and stuff it in your pack. Still too warm? Loosen a few
buttons on your shirt or slip off your mittens and hat.
You also can use layering to keep cool in hot climates by
stripping down to hiking shorts, a T-shirt, and a brimmed hat.
Lightweight long pants and a long-sleeved shirt will shield you
from insects, brush, and the sun.


34 CAMPING
Gearing Up.
Footwear for Camping
Almost any durable shoes will do for a
frontcountry camping trip. When your
plans include walking to a backcountry
campsite with all your food and gear in
your pack, hiking boots can give your
feet and ankles protection and support.
In addition to boots for hiking, you
might want to carry a pair of running
shoes or other comfortable, lightweight
shoes to wear around camp. Any shoes
or boots you use for camping must fit
well. Your heels should not slip much
when you walk, and your toes should
have a little wiggle room.
Clean your boots or shoes after
every outing. Use a stiff brush to remove
mud, or wash them off with water and mild soap, then allow
footwear to dry at room temperature. (Placing shoes too close to
a campfire can dry out leather and damage nylon.) The manufac-
turers of leather boots might recommend treatment with a boot
dressing or waterproofing agent; follow their instructions.
Sleeping Bag
On clear summer nights, a ground bed made up with a blanket
or two may provide all the warmth you need. For most camp-
ing, though, a sleeping bag is the way to go. The outer fabric of
a sleeping bag is called the shell. Usually made of nylon, it can
shield you from gusts of wind and may be treated by the manu-
facturer to repel dew and light mist.
Contained within the shell is an insulating fill material that
traps your body warmth and holds it close to you. Thin fabric
walls called baffles are sewn into the shell to keep the fill mate-
rial spaced evenly throughout the bag.
Be sure to break in new boots before using them in the
field. Wear them several times, gradually extending the
length of time you wear them, until they feel like a nat-
ural part of your feet.


CAMPING 35
The warmest fill material per ounce is goose down—the
fluffy underfeathers of waterfowl. Explorers, mountaineers, and
campers through the decades have relied on down when they
expected to sleep out in the cold. Down bags are expensive,
cannot keep you warm when they are wet, and are difficult to
dry in camp unless the sun comes out. With all of that in mind,
it’s still a fact that down bags are good when campers want to
travel as lightly as possible and have the experience to keep
their bags dry.
Synthetic fill can be almost as light as goose down, but it
seldom is as costly. Its greatest advantage is that it can keep you
warm even when your sleeping bag gets
wet. You will, of course, be much
more comfortable in a dry
synthetic-fill bag than in a wet
one, so don’t be careless with
it in stormy weather.
The useful life of any
sleeping bag can be extended
if you remove it from its stuff
sack between trips. Store it by
hanging it in a closet or by placing it
loosely in a large cotton laundry bag.
That will prevent the fill material from
being overly compressed, and circulating air
will help keep the bag fresh.
Sleeping Pad. Increase your comfort at night with
a sleeping pad. Made of foam, a pad will give you a
soft surface on which to lie and will prevent the cold
earth beneath you from drawing away your body heat.
Foam pads are often lighter and more durable than air mat-
tresses, and they insulate better.
Ground Cloth. Keep moisture away from your bedding with
a ground cloth—a plastic sheet cut to a size slightly smaller
than the tent floor. Tuck the edges of the ground cloth beneath
the floor of your tent so that rainwater will not collect on the
cloth and run under the tent.
.Gearing Up


36 CAMPING
Gearing Up.
PAD EXTENDS
JUST BELOW CHEST
ADJUSTABLE
STRAP
BELT ON HIP REST
LOW PRESSURE
ON SHOULDER
Pack
Packs can be either external or internal framed. Many people
feel that packs with internal frames fit better. Streamlined,
compact shapes make these packs good for use while skiing,
climbing, and traveling cross-country. Because they hug your
body, they make it easier to keep your balance, and they fit
more easily into canoes than do packs with external frames.
External-frame packs are popular among Scouts who prefer
them for backpacking along open trails or for carrying
heavy loads.
When shopping
for a new back-
pack, ask the
store clerk to load
it with 20 to 30
pounds of weight.
Swing it onto your
shoulders, adjust
it for a comfort-
able fit, then carry
it around the store
for a while to get
a feel for it. That
will help you know
when you have
found the right
pack for you.
External-frame packInternal-frame pack


CAMPING 37
.Gearing Up
Tents
The development of synthetic fabrics has opened a new era of
possibilities for tent designers. Nylon and breathable fabrics
lend themselves to roomy shelters that pack small and weigh
little. Flexible poles made of aluminum or fiberglass make
possible geometric tent shapes that stand up to tremendous
amounts of wind, rain, and snow. A ground cloth underneath
the tent floor protects it from abrasion and provides an added
barrier to moisture.
Most tents used by Scouts today have a tent body made of
breathable nylon. The tent body is shielded from rain, snow,
and wind by a waterproof rain fly. Moisture created by people
breathing inside the tent passes through the tent body, keeping
the interior dry and comfortable.
Modern tents are
often rated as
three-season
(good for spring,
summer, and
autumn use)
or four-season
(reliable in any
conditions,
including winter
camping). Four-
season tents may
have additional
poles and more
durable fabric,
thus making
them sturdier
but heavier.
Because of the great variety of tents on the market
today, be sure you follow the manufacturer’s instruc-
tions on how to pitch your tent. Practice pitching your
tent before you go camping. Here are a few tips for
pitching a tent:
• At the campsite, choose a level site that drains well.
• Remove stones and large sticks, but try not to disturb
the natural ground cover.
• Spread out a ground cloth to protect the tent floor
from dirt, sharp objects, and moisture.
• Unfold the tent on top of the ground cloth. Pull out
the corners of the floor and stake them to the ground,
then assemble the poles and put them in place.
• Use taut-line hitches to tie the free ends of guylines
around stakes you have pushed into the ground, and
pull the lines tight.
• Put a rain fly over the tent and stake it down.
No Fires in Tents
Keep all flames away from tents. Never use candles,
matches, stoves, heaters, or lanterns in or near tents. No
tent is fireproof. All of them can burn or melt when
exposed to heat. Use flashlights only!


38 CAMPING
Gearing Up.
Common Tent Shapes
Tarps. The simplest of all tents, a tarp can be pitched in many
ways—as a lean-to, for instance, or a pyramid, or a pup tent.
The advantages of a tarp are its light weight and versatility.
However, it has no floor, offers little protection against insects,
and must be pitched well in order to protect campers from rain.
Tarps often are used as dining flies to shelter group cook sites.
A-Frames. Seen from the front, this tent is shaped like the let-
ter A, thus its name. Most A-frame tents are equipped with
mosquito netting, a rain fly, and a waterproof floor.
Domes. Tents with a dome shape can be spacious with lots
of headroom. The arrangement of poles bending over the tent
body gives a dome plenty of stability, even in strong winds.
Domes are often freestanding—requiring no tent stakes. Since
dome tents are usually larger than A-frames, they also can
weigh more.
Dome tent
Hybrid tent
A-frame tentTarp


CAMPING 39
.Gearing Up
Hybrids. Mix geometry, modern materials, and the imagina-
tions of tent makers, and you get an astounding variety of
shapes. Among the most interesting are hybrid tents that
combine features of A-frames and domes. Some look like round-
ed A-frames, tunnels, or domes cut in half. Doors may
be at the ends, or sewn into one or both sides. Many include
a vestibule—a porchlike extension of the rain fly that provides
shelter outside the tent body for storing packs, crew gear, and
muddy boots.
Breathable Tents
Lots of rain gear today is made of fabric that protects you from
precipitation and, at the same time, allows moisture given off
by your body to escape. The same material is sometimes used
to make tents. Because they do not need a rain fly, these single-
wall breathable tents are lightweight yet strong enough to stand
harsh conditions. On the other hand, they are usually small,
can be clammy in warm weather, and may be very expensive.
Wall Tents
For long-term, frontcountry outings such as a week at a
Scouting America council camp, your group may use wall tents.
Large enough for several Scouts to unroll their sleeping bags on
the floor or on cots, modern wall tents are constructed of can-
vas, a polyester-cotton blend, or nylon. A ridgepole running
between two upright poles holds the tent erect. Windows or the
side walls of many large tents can be opened in hot weather to
allow interior ventilation. Most wall tents are too heavy and
cumbersome for use on backcountry campouts.
Never dig ditches
around your tent;
they leave scars
on the ground that
can take a long
time to heal.
Wall tent


40 CAMPING
Gearing Up.
Tent Care
• Take off your boots before crawling into a tent. Stocking feet
are kinder to tent floors, and you won’t track in mud. Store
your boots by the tent door, under the shelter of the rain fly.
• The stitched seams in the rain flies of new tents may need
to be sealed to prevent moisture from leaking through. New
tents usually include seam sealer and the manufacturer’s
instructions for applying it.
• Tent fabric can be harmed by too much exposure to sunlight.
Of course, your tent may be set up in a sunny place for a day
or two during a campout, but try to avoid leaving it pitched
in the open when it is not in use or when you can put it in a
shaded campsite instead.
• Clean out your tent by sweeping it or, if it is small, by tipping
it up and shaking out litter and debris.
• To stow a tent in a storage sack, first place the bundle of
collapsed poles in the tent’s stuff sack. Next, push a corner
of the tent all the way to the bottom of the sack. Continue
stuffing the fabric alongside the poles.
• A tent that seems dry in camp may have absorbed dew or
ground moisture. For that reason, it is important that you
always unpack your tent when you get home and set it up,
hang it over a clothesline, or suspend it from nails in the
rafters of a shed or basement. Allow it to dry completely
before storing it.


.Gearing Up
Stoves
For much of Scouting’s history, no campout was complete
without a wood fire. Scouts prided themselves on their ability
to kindle a blaze in any conditions, even in a rainstorm. They
used fires to cook their meals and, in the evenings, as the
center of a camp’s activities.
There are times when a campfire is still appropriate, and
there are campsites where open fires will do little or no harm.
However, Scouts today are wiser in knowing when not to build
a fire. Through the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the
Outdoor Code, they understand that fires can leave scars on the
land, blackening stones and sterilizing soil. Lighting campfires
in heavily used campsites can mar surrounding forests as peo-
ple gather up every stick of dead wood and break off tree
branches for fuel.
Instead, most Scout campers now use stoves for cooking,
and that means they can prepare meals where there is little
firewood or none at all. With camp stoves, they can make
themselves comfortable in nearly every sort of weather and
on almost any terrain.
Selecting a Stove
The stove you choose depends upon the kind of cooking you
will do, the type of fuel you wish to use, and the amount of
weight you are willing to carry. Of the many stoves on the
market, those burning the following fuels are most useful in
camp. Always read and follow the manufacturer’s instructions
for carrying, fueling, using, and storing camp stoves.
CAMPING 41
Carefully follow stove
manufacturers’ instructions
when selecting fuel. Some stoves
operate only with white gas,
while others also burn unleaded
gasoline, kerosene,
or even jet fuel.


42 CAMPING
Gearing Up.
White Gas. White gas is a highly distilled fuel used in many
North American backpacking stoves. Some white gas stoves
must be preheated, often by squeezing a dab of flammable paste
into a depression at the base of the burner stem. Preheating
increases the pressure inside the fuel tank, forcing vapor-
ized fuel up a stem and into a burner where it can be
ignited with a match. Once the burner is roaring, it will
keep the fuel tank hot enough to maintain a steady
supply of vaporized fuel.
More advanced white gas stoves are equipped with
pumps to pressurize their fuel tanks. That can be a real
advantage in cold weather.
Cartridge Stoves. Simplicity, safety, and convenience are
features of butane and propane cartridge stoves. Cartridge
stoves need no pumping or preheating; simply attach a
fuel canister, turn the control knob, and light the burner.
Cartridge stoves work well in warm weather and at high
altitudes, but they lose efficiency as the temperature drops.
Propane Tank Stoves. Two-burner propane stoves
are too heavy for backpacking but can be just right for larger
groups on river rafting expeditions and for Scout
groups camping close to a road.
Kerosene. Kerosene is a hot-burning, nonexplosive fuel
available almost anywhere in the world. While kerosene
camping stoves are unusual in North America, they are a
familiar sight on international expeditions. A kerosene stove
must be preheated before it can be lit.
Cartridge stove
Propane tank stove


CAMPING 43
.Gearing Up
Using Stoves Safely
Stoves of different designs operate in different ways.
Before lighting any stove, read and understand
the manufacturer’s instructions. Then follow
the instructions exactly. In addition, always heed
these stove safety rules:
1. Never use a stove inside or near a tent.
2. Don’t overload a stove with a heavy pot. Instead, set up a grill over the
stove to bear the weight of the pot.
3. Never leave a burning stove unattended.
4. Let a stove cool completely before you put it away. (In preparation for
long-term storage—a month or more—empty the fuel tank.)
5. Do not open the fuel cap of a hot stove or attempt to refuel a hot stove.
6. Store liquid fuel only in well-marked metal fuel bottles designed
specifically for that use.
7. Even if they are empty, keep fuel bottles and canisters away from
sources of heat.
8. Reduce fire danger at home by storing all fuel containers in a shed,
garage, or other uninhabited structure, not inside your house.


44 CAMPING
Gearing Up.
Cook Kits and Utensils
As you plan meals for a campout, list the pots and pans you
will need for preparing each dish. Your list might include a
frying pan and pots of various sizes, each with a lid to hold
in heat and keep out insects and dust. Your troop may have
its own Scout cook kits. If not, check secondhand stores and
garage sales for good buys on used pots and pans. Complete
the kit with a pair of hot-pot tongs for safely lifting pots and
pans from the stove.
To carry cooking gear, divide the
items among the members of your
group. Save space by stuffing the
pots with spare clothing or food
packets before you put them into
your packs. Carry large pots by
slipping them over the ends of
sleeping bags strapped to external-
frame packs.
Plastic Sheets. A couple of plastic sheets about 4 feet
square can serve as clean surfaces for food preparation
and equipment storage.
Water Containers. Besides individual water bottles, you may
find it convenient to have a few collapsible plastic water con-
tainers for use in camp. Common container sizes are 1 gallon
and 2 1
⁄2 gallons.
Cleanup Materials. Dishwashing is easier if you have the right
supplies. Several soapless scouring pads, a rinse agent, and a
little biodegradable soap will take care of most of your needs.
A convenient way to stow pots, pans, and personal eating gear
is by placing items, as soon as they are washed, in a small
fishnet hammock strung between two trees, or in a mesh bag
tied to a branch.
Trash Bags. Large plastic trash-can liners come in handy as
storage sacks, as emergency ponchos and pack covers, and for
suspending food on bear lines. They can also be used for carry-
ing trash home at the end of a trip.
Cook kits may vary, depending on the type of
camping your troop or patrol has planned.
A few utensils will
help you turn out
tasty meals with
ease. Depending
on your menus,
consider taking
a spatula, ladle,
stirring spoon,
vegetable peeler,
and can opener.


CAMPING 45
.Gearing Up
Pack Your Pack
You have planned a campout and gathered your
food and gear. After loading everything into
your pack, there should be little left to do
except head out the door and let the
adventure begin.
Besides your own gear, you probably
will carry some group equipment. Your
share might include several pots, part of a
tent, a camp stove, and some food. Arrange
soft items in your pack so they will cushion
your back. Keep your rain gear, flashlight, first-aid kit,
water bottle, and hike food near the top of your pack or
in its outside pockets where you can reach them easily.
If there is room, stow your sleeping bag inside your
pack. Otherwise, cover it with a ground cloth or a plastic
trash-can liner to protect it from the elements. Tuck it under the
pack’s top flap, or strap it to the external frame. (Some Scouts
put a trash-can liner inside a stuff sack first, then stuff the
sleeping bag into it. The resulting bundle is neat, waterproof,
and easy to pack.)
With everything in place, try on your pack. Is it comfort-
able? Does it feel balanced? Are the straps and hip belt properly
adjusted? Are the items on the outside of the pack secured so
that they won’t swing around or fall off as you hike? Make any
changes now so that you can hit the trail with a pack that is
balanced, neat, and easy to carry.





CAMPING 47
.Making Camp, Breaking Camp
Making Camp,
Breaking Camp
Getting There
There are many ways you can travel to camp. Often you will
hike in—perhaps a short distance, perhaps many miles. Your
group may journey to a frontcountry camp by automobile, van,
bus, or bicycle. Where lakes and streams abound, you may go
in canoes or a raft guided with oars.
Many campsites can be reached with the help of a
topographical map and a compass. Your Scouts BSA
Handbook can provide you with guidelines for using
a compass and a map to find your way. The Fieldbook
and the Orienteering merit badge pamphlet contain
more detailed information on route-finding in all kinds
of terrain.
Consider keeping
a diary or a
personal journal
of your trek as a
way of recording
all that you see
and experience.


48 CAMPING
Making Camp, Breaking Camp.
Global Positioning System
The global positioning system, or GPS, gives travelers a
powerful electronic means of navigation. A GPS receiver
small enough to fit in your pocket accurately calculates
the longitude and latitude of any spot on the globe by
taking bearings on satellites orbiting 12,000 miles above
Earth. With it, you can identify where you are, plot a
course to a campsite or other destination, and keep
track of your elevation above sea level. As you move,
you can program a GPS receiver to plot the record of
your route, then use it later to retrace your steps.
Refer to the user’s manual that comes with a GPS
receiver to explore its many capabilities. Be aware,
though, that just as having a calculator does not
eliminate the need to know how to add and subtract,
a GPS receiver (especially one with dead batteries) is
no substitute for being able to navigate the backcountry
with traditional tools. Develop confidence in your
ability to use maps and compasses and then, if you
wish, use them with a GPS receiver.


CAMPING 49
.Making Camp, Breaking Camp
Selecting a Campsite
Much of the success of a campout depends upon the campsite
you choose. A good place to camp offers plenty to see and do.
Also, by following the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and
the Outdoor Code, you can be sure your camp will be easy on
the land.
Safety
Don’t pitch a tent under dead trees or limbs that might fall in
a storm. Stay out of gullies that could fill with flash floods.
Find a site away from lone trees, mountaintops, high ridges,
and other likely targets of lightning. Camp some distance from
game trails, especially in bear country.
Size
A site must be large enough for members of your camping
party to pitch their tents and cook their meals. When hanging
food to keep it away from animals, find the trees you need at
least 200 feet from where you will be sleeping.
Terrain
Does the site you have chosen for camp slope gently for good
drainage? Leaves, pine needles, and other natural cover can
keep the ground from becoming muddy. An area open to the
east and south will catch sunlight early in the day and perhaps
be drier than slopes facing north.


50 CAMPING
Making Camp, Breaking Camp.
Privacy
Respect the privacy of others. Trees, bushes, and the shape of
the terrain can screen your camp from trails and neighboring
campsites. Keep the noise down when other campers are stay-
ing nearby.
Permission
Check well ahead of time with land managers of public parks,
forests, and reserves. They can issue any permits you will
need and may suggest how you can make the most of your
campouts. Get permission from owners before camping on
private property.
Water
You will need water for drinking, cooking, and cleanup—
several gallons a day for each Scout. Public water supplies
(faucets and drinking fountains) are safest and can often be
found in frontcountry campsites. Water taken from streams,
rivers, or lakes must be properly treated before use. Camping in
dry regions can be very rewarding, though you must carefully
plan how you will transport the water you need to your camp.


CAMPING 51
.Making Camp, Breaking Camp
Open Water. Water taken from streams, lakes, and springs may
contain bacteria and parasites too small for you to see. Treat
any water that does not come from a tested source, using one
of the following methods.
• Boiling. Bringing water to a rolling boil for a full
minute or more will kill most organisms.
• Treatment Tablets. Water treatment tablets are sold in
small bottles just right for hikers and campers. The label
usually instructs you to drop one or two tablets into a
quart of water and then wait 30 minutes before drinking.
Tablets may leave a chemical taste in the water. After the
tablets have had a full 30 minutes to do their work, you
can improve the flavor by adding some drink mix.
• Filters. Camping stores and catalogs offer water
treatment filters that are effective and easy
to use. Some operate by pumping water
through pores small enough to strain out
bacteria. Others contain chemicals or
carbon. Follow the instructions that
come with the filter you plan to use.
Managing Your Campsite
Once you arrive at a site, the first order of
business is to figure out the best way to set-
tle in while causing little impact on the land.
• Set up a dining fly first. That will provide
shelter for food and you in case of rain and
will give a sense of where you will center most
of your camp activities.
• Pitch your tents. Use established tent sites whenever
possible. In bear country, tents should be 200 feet or
more from the cooking area and from areas where food
will be stored.
• Establish a plan for personal sanitation and be sure everyone
understands what he or she is to do.
Treatment tablets can quickly lose their strength
after a bottle has been opened. Find the date on
the label and use only fresh tablets.


52 CAMPING
Making Camp, Breaking Camp.
Sanitation
Getting rid of human waste outdoors requires special
care. In campgrounds that have rest rooms or
outhouses, be sure to use them. Where those
don’t exist, dig a cathole or use a latrine.
Wash your hands with soap and water or use
a waterless hand cleanser when you are done.
Cathole. Find a private spot at least 200 feet
(75 steps) from water, campsites, and trails.
Dig a hole 6 to 8 inches deep with your heel,
a stick, or a shovel. Organisms in the top
layers of earth will break down human waste.
Fill the cathole with soil when you are done,
and replace any ground cover. Push a stick
into the earth to warn others against digging
in the same spot.
Latrine. A patrol, troop, or other large camping group
may be able to lessen its impact on the land by digging a
single latrine rather than making many catholes. Check with a
ranger or other local expert for guidance.
To make a latrine, use a shovel to dig a shallow trench a
foot wide and 3 to 4 feet long. Remove and save any ground
cover. As with a cathole, go no deeper than the topsoil so that
waste will be buried in organic earth where it will turn into soil
nutrients. Sprinkle a layer of soil into the trench after each use
to keep away flies and hold down odors. Return all the soil to
the latrine when you break camp, and restore the ground cover.


CAMPING 53
.Making Camp, Breaking Camp
Cleaning Up After Meals
Whether you cook with a stove or over an open fire, put on a
pot of water before you serve a meal. That way you will have
hot dishwater by the time you finish eating.
Each person can wash his or her own eating gear. If every-
one also does one pot, pan, or cooking utensil, the work will be
finished in no time. Use hot-pot tongs to dip plates and spoons
in the hot-rinse water. Lay clean utensils on a plastic ground
sheet and let them air dry.
Dealing With Leftovers. Carry food scraps home in a trash
bag. Don’t bury leftover food or scatter it in the woods. Animals
will almost always find it, and it is not healthy for them to eat.
Food scraps can draw animals close to campsites where they
may lose their fear of humans. That can be dangerous for them
and for you.
Begin cleanup by setting out three pots:
• Hot-water wash pot—hot water with a few drops of
biodegradable soap
• Hot-water rinse pot—clear, hot rinse water
• Cold-water rinse pot—cold water with a sanitizing
tablet or a few drops of bleach to kill bacteria


54 CAMPING
Making Camp, Breaking Camp.
Dishwater Disposal. For campouts
lasting no more than a couple of
days, use a small kitchen strainer to
remove food bits from your wash
water and put them in your trash.
Carry the wash and rinse water away
from camp and at least 75 steps from
any streams or lakes. Give it a good
fling, spreading it over a wide area.
For longer stays at one site, dig a
sump hole at the edge of camp and at
least 200 feet from streams, lakes, or
other open water. Make the hole
about a foot across and 2 feet deep.
Pour dishwater through the kitchen
strainer into the hole, or place a piece
of window screen across the hole and
pour the water into the sump through
that. The strainer or screen will catch
food particles so that you can shake
them into a trash bag. Fill the sump
hole when you break camp, and
replace any ground cover.
Food Storage
Store your food where it will be safe from animals, insects,
dust, debris, and bad weather. Frontcountry campers can use
vehicles, coolers, or plastic buckets with tightly fitted lids as
storage units. In the backcountry and any-
where that bears may be present, a bear
bag is often the answer. Not only will
your food be secured, hanging any-
thing with an aroma will give bears
no reason to linger in your camp.
Land managers of camping
areas frequented by bears can give
you further information about the
best ways to store your food.
Their suggestions may include
using metal bear boxes or other
storage canisters that cannot be
opened by wildlife.
Wash out jars
and cans, and
carry them home
for recycling.
Save space by
cutting out the
ends and then
flattening cans.


CAMPING 55
.Making Camp, Breaking Camp
Here are three ways to suspend food and other “smellables.”
1. Find a tree with a sturdy horizontal branch about 20 feet above the
ground. Put a couple of handfuls of soil in a bandanna or plastic bag and
secure it to the end of a 50-foot length of nylon parachute cord. Toss the
weight over the branch. Stash your provisions in a sturdy plastic trash
bag or waterproof stuff sack. Twist it closed and secure it to one end of
the cord with a clove hitch. Pull the other end of the cord to raise the
bottom of the bag at least 12 feet off the ground and 8 feet away from
tree trunks—well beyond the reach of any bears. Secure the free end of
the cord to a tree.
2. If there is not a good branch nearby, find two trees about 20 to 30 feet
apart. Toss a line over a branch close to the trunk of one tree, then toss
the other end of the line over a branch of the second tree. Tie your bear
bag to the center of the line, and hoist it high between the two trees.
3. Bears accustomed to raiding campsites may be smart enough to claw
loose the tied end of a cord. To prevent that, divide your provisions
equally between two bear bags. Raise one up to a high branch, as you
would in the first bag-hanging method. Tie the free end of the cord to
the second bag and lift it overhead. Use a stick or hiking staff to shove
it out of reach of animals. The bags will counterbalance one another,
and your food will be safe. To retrieve the bags, use a stick to push one
bag even higher, causing the other to come down within your grasp.


56 CAMPING
Making Camp, Breaking Camp.
Fun in Camp
Setting up and managing a camp takes time, but there is more
to camping in the outdoors than that. A campout can get you
close to an area where you can enjoy an exciting activity—
swimming, for example, or kayaking, photography, or environ-
mental studies. As you plan a trip, think about the opportunities
for adventure within easy reach of your campsite. Other
possibilities include:
• Take a day hike to a lake, the top of a mountain, a scenic
vista, or another point of interest.
• On winter trips, try cross-country skiing or snowshoeing.
Build an igloo or a snow cave. Look in the snow for the
footprints of wildlife, and follow them to discover the habits
of different animals.
• Bike along trails open to pedaling.
• Go canoeing, rafting, or fishing.
• With proper supervision, take part with your group in orga-
nized climbing and rappelling activities. Learn the correct
skills and safety procedures from qualified instructors.


CAMPING 57
.Making Camp, Breaking Camp
Don’t forget that
requirement 9c
calls for you to
perform a conser-
vation project
approved by the
landowner or
land management
agency. Your merit
badge counselor
will be a good
source of
information as
you plan and
carry out your
project. See the
Environmental
Science, Soil
and Water
Conservation,
and Sustainability
merit badge
pamphlets for
ideas, too.
Stormy Weather Camping
When the weather turns bad, your camping skills can be put
to a real test. Draw on previous outdoor experiences and stay
focused on the task at hand, and you should be able to make
the most of a campout no matter what the clouds throw at you.
Here is one way to go about it.
• First, look after your personal safety and that of your group.
Take steps to stay warm and dry, and be on the lookout for
signs of hypothermia.
• Secure your camp. If you have just arrived at a campsite,
set up a dining fly and use it to shelter your gear while you
pitch the tents.
• Fire up a camp stove, heat a pot of water, and soon you can
lift everyone’s spirits with hot drinks, bowls of soup, and
other kitchen delights.
• Be patient. You won’t be able to change the weather, so
there’s no need to become upset even if the rain has cut
short other outdoor activities.
Now and then there is nothing better than tent time in a storm.
With a dry tent, a warm sleeping bag, and a good book, you
can settle in for a few relaxed hours. Add good friends to share
stories and games, and you will find that being weather-bound
can be one of camping’s great pleasures.


58 CAMPING
Making Camp, Breaking Camp.
Lightning Safety Tips
The National Weather Service warns, “When thunder roars, go indoors!”
The only completely safe action in a storm is to get inside a safe building
or vehicle and remain there until 30 minutes after you hear the last rumble
of thunder.
However, if you are in the backcountry when bad weather strikes, take
these precautions when you can.
• Avoid open fields, hilltops, and ridgetops.
• Spread your group out 100 feet from one another if possible.
• Stay away from tall, isolated trees and other tall objects. If you are in a
forest, stay near a lower stand of trees.
• If you are camping in an open area, set up camp in a valley, ravine, or
other low area, but avoid flood-prone areas. Remember, a tent offers
NO protection from lightning or flash floods.
• Stay away from water, wet items (such as ropes), and metal objects
(such as fences and poles). Water and metal are excellent conductors
of electricity.
If lightning strikes, be prepared to administer CPR (cardiopulmonary resus-
citation) so that you can tend to lightning victims quickly. Take anyone who
is a victim of a lightning strike or near-strike to the nearest medical facility
as soon as possible, even if the person appears to be unharmed.


CAMPING 59
.Making Camp, Breaking Camp
Breaking Camp
All good things must come to an end, and that includes camp-
ing trips. As you break camp, keep in mind these suggestions:
• Leave the dining fly in place until you are almost ready to
go. It can serve as a last-minute shelter for people and gear.
• With the doors open, shake out the tents before stuffing
them in their storage sacks.
• Check the locations of catholes and latrines to be sure they
have been buried and ground cover has been restored.
• If you used an established fire lay, dig through the cold
ashes. Remove and pack out any bits of food, metal, and
other litter and trash.
• Inspect the areas used for cooking, food storage, and tents,
and be sure you have picked up everything you brought to
camp. Leave the campsite looking better than you found it.
Back Home
Going to just leave that pack on the floor when you get home?
Taking care of your gear lengthens the life of your gear, too.
• Clean and air out all of your gear, including sleeping bags.
Then hang up the sleeping bags or store them loosely in
large cotton sacks.
• Set up tents or hang them from a clothesline or indoors.
• Wash your dirty clothes.
• Scrub all pots and pans clean.
• Brush any dirt or mud from your
boots and treat them with boot
dressing to keep the leather flexible
and water-repellent.
Lastly, start planning another adventure.
The next time you want to go camp-
ing—and it won’t be long—you will
already be well on your way to the
great out-of-doors.





CAMPING 61
.Giving Full Meaning to Camping
Giving Full Meaning
to Camping
Whether you pitch your tent in the same place many times or
you enjoy a campsite and then move on, everywhere that you
sleep in the open becomes part of your personal outdoor history.
You will be surprised over the years how often these adventures
come to mind, and with what pleasure you remember the
places that, at least for one night, you called home.
Camping is a central activity of the Scouts BSA experience,
and for good reason. It can bring out the best in everyone as
groups of friends put their energies into practicing outdoor
skills, solving problems, and having great times together. You
can increase your understanding of personal health and safety,
conservation, and the citizenship responsibilities of caring for
the land. Most of all, camping allows your Scout spirit and the
meaning of the Scout Oath and Scout Law to shine through in
all that you do.
Scout Oath
On my honor I will do my best
To do my duty to God and my country
And to obey the Scout Law;
To help other people at all times;
To keep myself physically strong,
Mentally awake, and morally straight.
Scout Law
A Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful, friendly,
courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave,
clean, and reverent.


62 CAMPING
Camping Resources.
Camping Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Basic Illustrated
Camping; Okpik: Cold-Weather Camping;
Don’t Get Sick; Leave No Trace;
Fieldbook; Conservation Handbook; Belay
On; Backpacking, Bird Study, Canoeing,
Cooking, Cycling, First Aid, Fishing,
Fly-Fishing, Geocaching, Hiking,
Kayaking, Mammal Study, Nature,
Orienteering, Rowing, Small-Boat
Sailing, Snow Sports, Sustainability,
Whitewater, and Wilderness Survival
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Birkby, Robert C. Lightly on the Land:
The SCA Trail Building and
Maintenance Manual, 2nd ed.
Mountaineers Books, 2006.
Brunelle, Lynn. Camp Out! The
Ultimate Kids’ Guide. Workman
Publishing Company, 2007.
Conners, Christine. The Scout’s Outdoor
Cookbook. FalconGuides, 2008.
Forgey M.D., William W. Basic
Essentials Wilderness First Aid,
3rd ed. FalconGuides, 2007.
Gorman, Stephen. The Winter Camping
Handbook, Countryman Press, 2016.
Graham, John. Outdoor Leadership:
Technique, Common Sense &
Self-Confidence. Mountaineers
Books, 1997.
Hampton, Bruce, and David Cole.
Soft Paths: How to Enjoy the
Wilderness Without Harming It,
3rd ed. Stackpole Books, 2003.
Harmon, Will. Leave No Trace:
Minimum Impact Outdoor
Recreation. Falcon, 1997.
Hart, John. Walking Softly in the
Wilderness: The Sierra Club Guide to
Backpacking, 4th ed. Sierra Club
Books, 2005.
Harvey, Mark. The National Outdoor
Leadership School’s Wilderness
Guide: The Classic Handbook.
Fireside, 1999.
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


CAMPING 63
.Camping Resources
Herow, William C. National Park
Service Camping Guide, 6th ed.
Roundabout Publications, 2017.
Jacobson, Cliff. Basic Illustrated Map
and Compass, Basic Essentials
Series. FalconGuides, 2008.
Marrone, Teresa. The Back-Country
Kitchen: Camp Cooking for
Canoeists, Hikers and Anglers.
Northern Trails Press, 1997.
McGivney, Annette. Leave No Trace:
A Guide to the New Wilderness
Etiquette, 2nd ed. Mountaineers
Books, 2003.
National Museum of Forest Service
History. Camp Cooking: 100 Years.
Gibbs-Smith, 2004.
Oswald, Michael Joseph. Your Guide to
the National Parks: The Complete
Guide to All 58 National Parks.
Stone Road Press, 2012.
Pearson, Claudia. NOLS Backcountry
Cooking: Creative Menu Planning for
Short Trips. Stackpole Books, 2008.
———, editor. NOLS (National Outdoor
Leadership School) Cookery, 6th ed.
Stackpole Books, 2012.
Randall, Glenn. Outward Bound
Backpacker’s Handbook, 3rd ed.
FalconGuides, 2013.
Viehman, John, editor. Trailside’s Hints
and Tips for Outdoor Adventure.
Rodale Press, 1993.
Wright, Micah. Camping With the Corps
of Engineers: The Complete Guide to
Campgrounds Built and Operated by
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
10th ed. The Wright Guide, 2015.
Organizations and Websites
Your local library, state parks, and
state conservation lands may also
serve as good resources for camping
in your area.
U.S. Bureau of Land Management
Office of Public Affairs
1849 C St. NW, Room 5665
Washington, DC 20240
Telephone: 202-208-3801
www.blm.gov
National Park Service
www.nps.gov
Northern Tier National High
Adventure Base
P.O. Box 509
Ely, MN 55731
Telephone: 218-365-4811
www.ntier.org
Philmont Scout Ranch
17 Deer Run Road
Cimarron, NM 87714
Telephone: 575-376-2281
www.philmontscoutranch.org
Sea Base
P.O. Box 1906
Islamorada, FL 33036
Telephone: 305-664-4173
www.bsaseabase.org
Summit Bechtel Family National
Scout Reserve
2550 Jack Furst Drive
Glen Jean, WV 25846
Telephone: 304-465-2800
www.summitbsa.org


Camping Resources.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1849 C St. NW
Washington, DC 20240-0001
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-9453
www.fws.gov
USDA Forest Service
1400 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20250-1111
Toll-free telephone: 800-832-1355
www.fs.usda.gov
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Dan Bryant—pages 32 (bowl and
spoon), 34, 36 (Scout), 51 (tablets),
and 52 (cathole)
John Fulton—cover (pack) and page
45 (pack)
Daniel Giles—cover (GPS receiver)
and page 56
Roy Jansen—cover (compass)
Christian Michaels—page 7
Mary Oakes—page 29
James Parker—page 53
Brian Payne—pages 22, 25, 29, 30, 45
(Scouts), and 55
Randy Piland—pages 26, 46, 54
(strainer), 55, and 57
Jesse Scofield—page 49
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!