CLIMBING


CLIMBING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35873
ISBN 978-0-8395-5001-3
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Young people today seek greater challenges, and climbing and
rappelling offer a worthy challenge. The satisfaction of safely
climbing a rock face is hard to top. While introduction of the
Climbing merit badge in 1997 spurred interest in these
activities through Scouting America, the proliferation of
climbing gyms and facilities has also made climbing and
rappelling readily available throughout the United States.
This increased interest has made Scouting America more
aware of the inherent risks of climbing and rappelling. More
accidents occur during unit rappelling than during council-
managed climbing or rappelling, and more accidents have
occurred during rappelling than climbing. Many climbing and
rappelling accidents could be avoided by having qualified
instruction from a conscientious adult who has the attention
and respect of the youth entrusted to his or her care.
Supervision by a caring adult who fully understands and
appreciates the responsibility he or she assumes helps assure
safety when youth engage in or prepare for climbing or
rappelling.
The adult supervisor’s relationship with youth should
reinforce the importance of following instructions. The adult
leader in charge and the climbing instructor share this
responsibility. The instructor is responsible for all procedures
and for safely conducting the climbing/rappelling activity. The
adult supervisor works cooperatively with the climbing
instructor and is responsible for all matters outside of the
climbing/rappelling activity.


CLIMBING 3
Belay On, No. 430-500, is the most authoritative
guide currently available from Scouting America.
Mountaineering: The Freedom of the Hills, ninth edition,
edited by Eric Linxweiler and Mike Maude, is a recommended
reference for specific questions not covered in Scouting
America literature. The chapter on transportation in the
Guide to Safe Scouting, No. 34416, is an appropriate resource
for instruction on how to safely get your unit to and from the
climbing/rappelling site.
Units that elect to participate in lead climbing and snow
and ice climbing are required to receive training from a
nationally recognized organization that trains climbing and
rappelling instructors.
Each of the following points plays an important role in
the overall Climb On Safely program. Fun and safe climbing/
rappelling activities require close compliance of Climb On
Safely by the adult supervisor and instructor. These points also
apply to bouldering—traversing a few feet above ground level.
1. Qualified Supervision. All climbing and rappelling must
be supervised by a mature, conscientious adult at least 21
years of age who understands the risks inherent to these
activities. This person knowingly accepts responsibility for
the well-being and safety of the youth in his or her care.
This adult supervisor is trained in and committed to
compliance with the eight points of Scouting America’s
Climb On Safely procedure and responsible for recruiting
and verifying the qualifications of the qualified instructors.
One adult supervisor is required for every 10 participants
with a minimum of two adults for any one group.
Climb On Safely is Scouting America’s
recommended procedure for organizing
unit climbing/rappelling activities at a
natural site or a specifically designed facility
such as a climbing wall or tower.
BELAY
ON


4 CLIMBING
The adult supervisor is responsible for ensuring that
someone in the group is currently trained in American Red
Cross First Aid and CPR (a six-and-one-half-hour course).
In addition, Wilderness First Aid (a 16-hour course) is
recommended for units going to remote areas. A course of
equivalent length and content from another nationally
recognized organization can be substituted. A higher level
of certification such as emergency medical technician
(EMT), licensed practical nurse (LPN), registered nurse
(RN), and licensed healthcare practitioner is also
acceptable if the person is trained in backcountry medical
care. The ARC’s Emergency Response, a 43½-hour course
that includes CPR, is highly recommended.
2. Qualified Instructors. A qualified climbing instructor
who is at least 21 years of age must supervise all Scouting
America climbing/rappelling activities. A currently
trained Scouting America climbing director or instructor
is highly recommended. There must be a minimum of
two instructors for all climbing and rappelling activities
(up to 12 participants) and one additional instructor for
each additional six participants to maintain a 6-to-1 ratio.
Contact your local council service center or council COPE/
Climbing committee to locate qualified instructors.


CLIMBING 5
Scouting America offers a section of National Camping
School for climbing directors, who in turn can train
climbing instructors. Contact your local council or www.
scouting.org for a schedule of National Camping Schools.
Instructors must agree to adhere to Climb On Safely and
the guidelines in Belay On. A capable instructor has
experience in teaching climbing and rappelling to youth,
acknowledges personal limitations, and exercises good
judgment in a variety of circumstances. The person who
just spent four days of free-solo climbing on a sheer rock
face may have technical skills but may lack teaching
ability or the ability to empathize with youth who may be
apprehensive about climbing.
Some examples of sources of qualified climbing and
rappelling instructors include, but are not limited to, the
following:
• Scouting America climbing directors or instructors.
• Professional Climbing Instructors Association
• Climbing Wall Association
• American Mountain Guides Association
• The Mountaineers
• University or college climbing/rappelling instructors
or students
• Leaders and instructors should also consult current
literature on climbing and rappelling for additional
guidance. Belay On is the most authoritative guide
currently available from Scouting America.
3. Physical Fitness. Require evidence of fitness for the
climbing/rappelling activity with a current Annual Health
and Medical Record, No. 680-001. A fitness regimen is
recommended prior to participation. The adult supervisor
should adapt all supervision, discipline, and precautions
to anticipate any potential risks associated with individual
health conditions. The adult supervisor should inform
the climbing instructor about each participant’s medical
conditions.


6 CLIMBING
4. Safe Area. All Scouting America climbing/rappelling
activities must be conducted using an established
climbing/rappelling site or facility. A qualified climbing
instructor should survey the site in advance of the activity
to identify and evaluate possible hazards and to determine
whether the site is suitable for the age, maturity, and skill
level of the participants. The instructor should also verify
that the site is sufficient to safely and comfortably
accommodate the number of participants in the activity
within the available time. An emergency evacuation route
must be identified in advance. A separate area should be
established for onlookers.
Each participant and staff member in the fall zone of a
climbing/rappelling site must wear a UIAA- or
CE-approved rock-climbing helmet. Everyone must be
belayed or tethered when within 8 feet of an edge where a
fall of more than 6 feet could occur.
5. Equipment. The climbing instructor should verify that the
proper equipment is available for the size and ability level
of participants. Helmets, rope, and climbing hardware must
meet appropriate requirements as outlined in Belay On. All
equipment must be acquired new and/or furnished by the
instructor and retired according to the manufacturer’s
recommendations.
When using a climbing gym, the climbing facility’s
procedures apply.


CLIMBING 7
6. Planning. When planning, remember the following:
• Share the climbing/rappelling plan and an alternate with
a parent or guardian and the unit committee.
• Secure the necessary permits or written permission for
using private or public lands.
• Enlist the help of a qualified climbing instructor.
• Be sure the instructor has a topographic map for the
area being used and obtains a current weather report for
the area before the group’s departure.
It is suggested that at least one of the adult leaders has an
electronic means of communication in case of an
emergency. Before any activity, an adult leader should
develop and share an emergency plan that includes the
location of a nearby medical facility and the means of
communicating with a parent or guardian during the
activity.
7. Environmental Conditions. The instructor, each adult
leader, and each participant assume responsibility for
monitoring potentially dangerous environmental conditions
that may include loose, crumbly rock; poisonous plants;
wildlife; and inclement weather. Use the buddy system to
monitor concerns such as dehydration, hypothermia, and
an unusually high degree of fear or apprehension. Always
follow the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the
Outdoor Code.
8. Discipline. Each participant knows, understands, and
respects the rules and procedures for safely climbing and
rappelling and has been oriented in Climb On Safely, the
Leave No Trace Seven Principles, and the Outdoor Code.
All participants should respect and follow all instructions
and rules of the climbing instructor. The applicable rules
should be presented and learned prior to the outing and
should be reviewed for all participants before climbing or
rappelling begins. When participants know the reasons for
rules and procedures, they are more likely to follow them.
The climbing instructor must be strict and fair, showing no
favoritism.
The concept of
challenge by
choice applies
to all climbing/
rappelling activities.
No one should
be forced or
pressured into
doing something
with which he
or she is not
comfortable.


8 CLIMBING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Climbing or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.


CLIMBING 9


10 CLIMBING


CLIMBING 11
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Getting Started . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Risk Management and First Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Climbing Smart: The Where and When . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Clothing and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Knots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 54
Climbing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Rappelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Climbing Ethics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Climbing Terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 88
Climbing Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92


Introduction.Introduction.
Introduction
“On belay?” you shout, and give the rope tied to your seat
harness a final inspection.
Far above you, at the top of a steep cliff, your partner
answers, “Belay on!”
“Climbing!” you respond and then listen for your partner
to reply, “Climb on!”
You reach up and lock your fingers over a nub of rock,
then place your foot in a small depression. Leaning out from
the cliff as you push up with your foot and leg, you find a
higher spot to place your other foot. You jam your free hand
into a narrow crack and move your other hand up from the
nub to grab a thin ledge.
Another foothold, another hand placement, and you are
moving smoothly up the rock. There is nothing but empty air
below you and open sky above, and your confidence soars.
If you slip, your partner will lock off the belay rope and keep
you from falling more than a few feet.
But you won’t fall this time. You’ve been practicing hard,
and you feel at home in this vertical world. With grace and
skill, you glide from one hold to the next, always looking ahead
to plan your next moves.
A cool wind blows against your face and the
sun warms your shoulders. You respect the height
but do not fear it. As you near the top of the cliff,
you are in control, using every bit of your ability
and concentration to make your way up the wall
of rock.
With a final move, you lift yourself to the top
of the cliff as your partner takes in slack from the
rope. “Off belay,” you say when you reach a safe place,
and wait for the answer: “Belay off.” You have successfully
climbed 30, 40, 50 feet or more. You’re a climber, and a huge
smile fills your face.
“When man pits
himself against
the mountain, he
taps inner springs
of his strength.
He comes to
know himself.”
—William O.
Douglas, mountain
climber and
U.S. Supreme
Court justice


CLIMBING 13
.Introduction
The Adventure
Do you love to climb? Do you feel freedom in leaving the flat
earth behind? Do high and windy places invite you to come
and explore? Climbing allows you to challenge yourself. It is
not a sport that requires tremendous muscular strength, though
being in good shape will allow you to enjoy it more. What
climbing does demand is mental toughness and the willingness
to practice hard to master a set of skills.
The adventure of climbing can also give you a new way to
have a good time in the outdoors. Climbing really is an activity
in which at least half of the fun is getting there. It’s great to
stand at the top of a climbing route, but even more exciting is
what it takes to reach the heights—making good moves and
using balance, judgment, and skill to move up steep walls.
Today, you don’t have to go to the mountains to learn
how to climb. There are plenty of climbing walls throughout
the country, and even indoor climbing gyms. If you are in the
mountains, your Scouting unit might combine climbing with
hiking and camping for terrific outdoor experiences.
As you explore the world of climbing, you can feel the joy
of making your way upward toward the open sky. You can test
your body and your mind. The skills you learn will form the
foundation of a sport you can enjoy for many years to come.
“Getting to the
summit is optional.
Getting back down
is mandatory.”
—Ed Viesters,
Himalayan
mountaineer
As you climb, you may develop a deeper respect for the world
around you and the important role you can play in protecting
climbing areas from harm.


14 CLIMBING
Introduction.
A Short History of Climbing
Climbing as a modern sport has its beginnings in
the 1700s, when people in Europe began trying
to ascend the high peaks of the Alps. How they
got to the top didn’t matter all that much; they
simply wanted to stand on the summits and
then get down alive.
By the early 20th century, climbers were
starting to figure out ways of using ropes to
protect each other in case of a fall. They also
invented rappelling, a way of descending that
Early mountaineers, their feet shod in heavy
boots, attacked the slopes with little more
than hemp ropes (which often broke) and
raw determination.


CLIMBING 15
.Introduction
at first was done using a rope passed under one thigh, across
the body, and over the opposite shoulder. This sort of climbing
allowed them to practice new ways to move up steep faces and
gave them the skill to tackle more difficult routes.
After World War II, plenty of Army surplus stores sold
camping and climbing equipment to the public at low prices.
Better rope also became available. Many climbers practiced in
places like Yosemite Valley in California, and the techniques
and equipment of climbing continued to improve.
Special climbing shoes became popular in the 1960s,
providing climbers a better chance to use small—even tiny—
holds on the rock. Many people also decided to do free climb-
ing—relying upon their skill alone to get up a rock face. They
no longer let the belay rope (safety rope) hold their weight,
but used the rope only to stop a fall if they slipped.
The sport of bouldering increased in popularity as climbers
worked out their moves just a few feet above the ground on
boulders. Since they weren’t climbing very high, boulderers
could—with permission—also enjoy their sport on the
sides of stone buildings and anywhere else they
could find a few holds for their hands and feet.
By the 1980s, artificial climbing walls began to
appear throughout the country, both indoors and out.
Many climbers use the walls to practice their tech-
nique and to gain endurance before going on trips
in real mountains. Climbers today can spend time
on any of hundreds of climbing walls throughout
the United States or in dozens of climbing gyms.
They also can challenge the mountains that
might be nearby or set off for the great peaks
of the world.
One thing about climbing has never changed:
The sky is still the only limit.
Modern climbers favor lightweight climbing shoes
and use climbing ropes and other specifically
designed gear for safety.


16 CLIMBING
Introduction.
Climbing Makes an Impression
There’s no telling where earning the Climbing merit badge might lead
you. Eagle Scout Wally Berg got his first taste of rock climbing under the
watchful eyes of instructors at Philmont Scout Ranch in the mountains
of northern New Mexico. He was hooked on the joy of climbing and
rappelling the cliffs above Cimarroncito Camp.
In the following summers, Wally became a Philmont ranger and trail
crew foreman, then added to his mountaineering experience as a full-time
instructor of backcountry skills. His expeditions have taken him to the
highest mountains on every continent of the globe, including four climbs
to the top of Mount Everest. (On the border between Nepal and Tibet,
Everest is the world’s highest peak.)
Years ago, two other Eagle Scouts—Jim and Lou Whittaker—began
going with their troop to the mountains near their home in Seattle,
Washington. One of their Scoutmasters was an experienced mountaineer.
He taught the Whittaker brothers how to climb, making sure they
learned well.
One thing led to another and, in 1963, Jim Whittaker became the first
American to climb Mount Everest. Lou Whittaker has also climbed many
famous mountains around the world and today runs a guide service that
leads people to the snowy top of Mount Rainier in Washington State.
Your climbing might not take
you up Mount Everest any time
soon, and you might not become
a professional mountain guide.
But learning to climb will give
you confidence, increase your
flexibility, and improve your
balance and strength.
Along the way, you are sure
to discover what Wally Berg and
the Whittaker brothers found
out—that climbing can be about
as much fun as any adventure
that Scouts can have.
Wally Berg


CLIMBING 17
.Introduction
The Language of Climbing
Some of the climbing terms used in this pamphlet
might be new to you. When you find a word or phrase
in italics that you don’t understand, try to figure out
what it means by closely reading the section in which
it appears. You will also find many of these terms, from
abseiling to wall, defined in the terminology chapter
near the back of the pamphlet.


18 CLIMBING
Getting Started.
Getting Started
This pamphlet describes many ways that you
can enjoy climbing and rappelling without
taking significant risks. Whether you are
a beginner, a world-class mountaineer, or
somewhere in between, always make safety
the key to all you do.
Learn From the Experts
Climbing is not a sport you can master by
reading a book or by setting out to do it on
your own. Trying to learn by trial and error
is simply unacceptable on cliffs and other
steep terrain or on unsupervised climbing
walls and rappel towers. The dangers are
far too great. You must have trained
instructors who can teach you the right
way to climb, belay, and rappel. They
also can explain what not to do.


CLIMBING 19
.Getting Started
What Is the Sport of Climbing?
The sport of climbing has three elements: climbing, rappelling,
and belaying. Climbing, of course, is the act of going up,
although a good climber can also move sideways and down.
Climbers use cracks, ledges, and other features on a natural or
artificial face as handholds and footholds. As they climb, they
study the rock for the route ahead and figure out a series of
moves that will lead them where they want to go.
Rappel is a French word meaning “recall.” A climber can
rappel down steep cliffs by making a controlled slide on a rope.
In modern rappelling, the rope is threaded in a special way
through a rappel device connected to a harness around the
waist so that the rappeller can regulate the speed of descent.
Many Scout camps and some units have qualified climbing
instructors. Another good way to begin rock climbing might
be to sign up for a class through a mountaineering club.
Some local colleges in mountainous areas offer instruction in
climbing and mountaineering. So do climbing schools, some
outing clubs, and most climbing gyms.


20 CLIMBING
Getting Started.
A basic fact of climbing and rappelling is that people
sometimes fall. They might slip while trying moves that are
more difficult than they have done before, or a hand or foot
might simply slip off a hold. Belaying, a way of protecting
climbers from injury, is intended to stop climbers before they
can fall very far. Instructors may anchor belayers to trees,
boulders, bolts, or other anchor points from which the belayer
cannot be pulled. A belayer then uses a belay device to control
a belay rope that is secured to a climber, taking in slack as the
climber moves up a wall and holding the rope tightly should
the climber fall.
A belayer also can protect a rappeller by letting out a
belay rope as the rappeller descends. If the rappeller slips,
the belayer can secure the belay rope and stop the fall.
Anyone who is bouldering—
practicing climbing moves closer to
the ground—does not need to be
tied into a belay rope but should be
protected by two or three spotters
in position, ready to break a person’s
fall and help prevent injury.
Scouting America climbing and
rappelling guidelines require that a
climber or rappeller be protected with a
belay rope during all Scouting America
climbing/rappelling activities where the
participant’s feet are more than shoulder
height above ground level.


CLIMBING 21
.Getting Started
Top-Rope Climbing and
Lead Climbing
In any climbing activities where a participant’s
feet are more than shoulder height above ground level,
that person must be protected with a top-rope belay.
In top-rope climbing, climbers are tied to belay
ropes that are anchored above them throughout their
climbs. Belayers may be managing the ropes from
the top of climbing routes or may be at the bottom
of the cliff or wall. A belayer stationed on the ground
uses a rope that goes up to an anchor at the top of the
climb, then back down to the climber. Because of its
shape, this kind of top-roping is sometimes called a
slingshot belay.
In lead climbing, climbers are tied to belay ropes
extending below them. As they climb, they insert artifi-
cial protection such as chocks, cams, nuts, or other
hardware into cracks in the rock, then attach the rope
with carabiners and/or quickdraws (two carabiners con-
nected with a short runner). In this way they are able to
establish points of protection as they ascend. Sport
climbing is similar to lead climbing, but the quickdraws
are used to attach the belay rope to bolts and hangers
that are already installed in the rock face.
The distance a lead climber may fall is determined
by how close the climber is to where a point of protec-
tion has been placed and by how effectively the belayer
handles the rope. During council and district activities,
lead climbing may be practiced only if lead climbers
are protected by a top-rope belay.


22 CLIMBING
Getting Started.
Climbing Classification System
Climbers have developed rating systems for describing the diffi-
culty of different climbs. Guidebooks for popular climbing areas
use these systems to help people decide which routes match
their skills. In the classification system most frequently applied
to climbing in North America, there are five classes.
If you have been on a Scout hike, you already know about
Class 1 travel. And, if you have backpacked cross-country, you
may have done some Class 2 work. Traveling through steeper
Class 1—Hiking.
Hands are not needed
for balance.
Class 2—Simple
scrambling. Hands
may be used now
and then for balance.
A rope is not needed,
although one may
be carried.
Class 3—Scrambling.
Using the hands and
some basic climbing
skills. A rope may be
used to belay any
party members
uncomfortable with
the exposure.
1
2 3


CLIMBING 23
.Getting Started
terrain may have introduced you to slopes rugged enough that
you must frequently use your hands for balance and be especially
careful because of an increased danger of falling; that’s Class 3
scrambling and/or slab climbing. Class 4 climbing can involve
short, steep sections where the use of a rope is recommended,
and unroped falls could result in injury.
Scouts can practice Class 5 skills at an outdoor climbing/
rappelling area or indoors at a climbing gym. Class 5 climbers
may become good belayers, too, since they often take their turn
handling the belay rope that should protect every Class 5 climber.
Class 4—Climbing with
a belay. Climbers should
be protected with a
belay rope.
Class 5—Roped climbing
with protection. Class 5
climbing is divided into
categories of difficulty
based on the Yosemite
Decimal System, which
is the North American
rating system. They range
from 5.1 (very easy) to
5.15 (extremely difficult).
Class 5 climbers ascend-
ing with their feet more
than shoulder-height
above the ground must
always be protected
with a belay rope.
4
5


Using proper belaying techniques helps make managing risk a habit and not
an afterthought.


CLIMBING 25
.Risk Management and First Aid
Risk Management
and First Aid
Climbing and rappelling, when properly done, are as safe
as most other Scouting adventure activities. Like most other
Scouting activities, there are certain risks to be managed with
careful planning, attention to safety issues, and being prepared
to respond well should an injury or illness occur. Even short
falls can lead to minor bruises or skinned knuckles and knees.
Though rare, a longer fall can result in sprains, abrasions,
or fractures.
Responding to Emergencies
Before beginning a climb, your group should work out an
emergency response plan that includes information about the
location of the nearest telephone and the telephone numbers
of the closest hospital, sheriff’s department, and rescue unit.
In many areas of the country, dialing 911 contacts all three.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation—CPR—is an important first
response in the event of a cardiac emergency. It is used only for
extreme emergencies—when the person has no pulse, indicating
that the heart has stopped beating.
When climbing at rock sites in the backcountry, you will be away from imme-
diate emergency assistance, and response times for emergency services
might be delayed. It is a good idea to be prepared by becoming trained in
wilderness first aid. Check with your local American Red Cross, National
Safety Council, or American Heart Association for appropriate courses.
As a climber, you
will follow many
of the same risk
management
guidelines that
you would for
any Scout hike
or camping trip.


26 CLIMBING
Risk Management and First Aid.
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R G I R L S
First Aid
While climbers prepare by keeping fit and planning ahead, first-
aid situations sometimes will arise. Always have a well-equipped
first-aid kit at hand, both while climbing and while traveling to
and from the site. All climbers should be prepared to take action.
Instructors at climbing and rappelling areas at Scout
camps should be trained to respond quickly to emergen-
cies. At indoor climbing gyms, the staff will take the lead
in treating injuries and contacting help.
Heat Reactions
Heat reactions, including heat exhaustion and heatstroke,
result when the body cannot keep itself cool enough. If some-
one feels dizzy, faint, nauseated, or weak; develops a head-
ache or muscle cramps; or looks pale and is sweating heavily,
treat for heat exhaustion. Have the person lie down in a cool,
shady spot with the feet raised. Loosen clothing and cool the
person with a damp cloth and fan. Have the victim sip water
slowly. Recovery should be rapid. If the condition worsens or
does not improve, get medical help.
Heatstroke occurs when the body’s heat-control system
shuts down, causing the victim’s temperature to rise to life-
threatening levels. The skin may be wet or dry but always will
be flushed and hot. The pulse is extremely rapid, and the per-
son will be disoriented or unconscious. Cool the victim immedi-
ately through immersion or with cold packs. When the victim is
able to drink, give all the water wanted. Treat for shock and
seek medical attention immediately.
CPR courses are designed to teach rescuers how to
recognize life-threatening conditions and respond
appropriately. Check with the American Red Cross, the
National Safety Council, the American Heart Association,
and other similar organizations in your area to find out
if they offer CPR and other first-aid training. Every
climbing or rappelling activity should include at least
one person on-site who is trained and certified in CPR.
You need to know CPR before you have to use it.
The Scouts BSA
handbooks and
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet
explain how to
identify the
conditions that
must exist before
performing CPR
on a person.
These books also
discuss first aid
in more detail.
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R B O Y S


CLIMBING 27
.Risk Management and First Aid
To prevent the familiar condition called sunburn, use
a sunscreen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15
and limit your exposure time. Apply sunscreen liberally before
exposure (don’t forget your ears and the back of your neck), and
reapply often if you are sweating. If your skin begins to redden
or if you feel discomfort, seek shade. Treat painful sunburn with
damp cloths. Remedies containing aloe vera also might provide
some relief. Protect your lips by applying a lip balm with an SPF
of at least 15. To protect your eyes, wear sunglasses.
Cold Reactions
Hypothermia occurs when a climber becomes so cold that the
ability to keep warm is lost. As the core temperature drops,
vital organs shut down. In extreme cases, death may result.
Hypothermia can sneak up on a climber gradually, especially
on a chilly, windy day. Since hypothermia impairs the ability to
think clearly, the victim may not realize the danger or be able
to respond to it. Prevent hypothermia by staying warm and dry,
taking breaks, and eating plenty of energy foods.
A victim who shows early symptoms of hypothermia will
feel cold, tired, and irritable. The victim’s teeth may chatter,
and the person may begin to shiver. As the condition worsens,
the victim begins to shiver uncontrollably and gets increasingly
confused. In advanced stages, the victim is disoriented, cannot
travel, and may collapse; the shivering stops, followed by
unconsciousness. Death may soon follow.
Take action to rewarm anyone who shows signs of hypo-
thermia and prevent further heat loss. Move the victim to a
shelter and wrap the person in a blanket or sleeping bag
(remove wet clothing) until body temperature warms to normal.
For additional warmth, keep the head covered. Give the victim
hot drinks if available (no caffeine or alcohol) and only if the
victim is alert enough to drink.
In severe cases you must actively warm the victim. Get the
person under shelter and into a sleeping bag. If possible, zip
two sleeping bags together. Crawl into the bag with your com-
panion and strip the clothing from both of you; this effort will
help generate body heat. The skin-to-skin contact also will
warm the victim and perhaps save a life.
Cold winter weather, especially if it is windy, brings with it
the danger of frostbite. Essentially, a part of the body becomes
frozen. The flesh becomes numb, though sometimes the victim
A frightened or
anxious victim
might breathe
too rapidly or too
deeply, which
can result in
hyperventilation.
Calmly encourage
the person to
relax and
breathe slowly.


28 CLIMBING
Risk Management and First Aid.
may not notice. If the freezing continues, the area will stiffen and
become grayish-white in color. To treat the victim, thaw the
affected area only if there is no risk of refreezing. Once warmed,
keep the affected area warm. Do not rub the area with snow. In
the field, use body heat. Put cold fingers under the armpit and
the warm palm of your hand on frostbitten nose, ears, or cheeks.
In a shelter, if possible, put cold feet on a companion’s bare
belly, or immerse the affected area in lukewarm water—no
warmer than 108 degrees. If blisters develop, apply a large sterile
dressing. Treat the victim for shock and immediately seek
medical attention.
Other Possible Climbing-Related Injuries
Rope burns, or friction burns, can occur when climbers allow
rope to slide too quickly through their hands or when any part
of the body comes in contact with a fast-moving rope. A rope
burn is characterized by raw, red skin and sometimes blistering.
The best protection against rope burns is, of course, to wear
climbing gloves, but if a burn does occur, clean the area with
mild soap and water to help prevent infection.
For typical stings and bites, carefully scrape away the
stinger with the edge of a knife blade. Don’t try to squeeze
it out—that will force more venom into the skin from the sac
attached to the stinger. An ice pack might reduce pain and
swelling. If you have 0.5 percent hydrocortisone cream,
apply it to help soothe insect stings and bites. For severe
and prolonged pain, or for any severe reaction, dizziness,
or respiratory distress, get medical help.
Dehydration
Dehydration, caused by lack of water in the body, can occur in cold or
warm weather—anytime a person is sweating profusely and/or not
drinking enough liquids. Avoid dehydration by drinking plenty of fluids and
eating enough throughout the day to keep your body well-balanced. If you
become weary or develop a headache or body aches, or if you become
confused, rest in the shade and sip water until the symptoms subside.
Climbers who
have severe
allergic reactions
to wasp, hornet,
or bee stings
should carry a
field treatment kit
with them on all
outings, and their
companions
should be familiar
with its use.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which means “to lessen
in force or intensity” and “to make less severe.” By taking precautions
to manage risk and first aid, you can be prepared to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any climbing hazard.


CLIMBING 29
.Risk Management and First Aid
Snakebite is rare and seldom fatal. Snakes generally try
to avoid humans and normally strike only when they sense
danger. The bite of a nonpoisonous snake requires only
ordinary first aid for small wounds—scrubbing with soap
and water, then treating with an antiseptic. However, the
bite of a poisonous snake can cause sharp, burning pain,
swelling, and discoloration. Follow these steps.
1. Seek medical care for the victim as soon as possible.
2. Remove rings and other jewelry that might cause problems
should the area around the wound swell.
3. Have the victim lie down and keep still; help the patient
stay calm to help slow the spread of the venom. Position the
wound area lower than the rest of the body.
Tick bites are common maladies in the outdoors. If a tick
has attached itself, grasp it with tweezers close to the skin
and gently pull until it comes loose. Don’t squeeze, twist,
or jerk the tick, as that might leave its mouthparts in the
skin. Wash the wound with soap and water; apply
antibiotic ointment. Dispose of the tick and thoroughly
wash your hands. (Always avoid direct contact with a tick
because disease can be transmitted by finger contact.) If a tick has been
embedded more than a day or poses difficulties in removal, see a physician.
As you climb, look out for snakes—watch where you put your hands.


30 CLIMBING
4. If medical help will be delayed, put a broad, constructing band
(strip of cloth, belt, or neckerchief at least 1 inch wide)
around the limb, 2 to 4 inches above the bite (between the
heart and the bite), to slow the spread of venom. This is not
a tourniquet; make the band snug but loose enough to slip
a finger under easily. Periodically check for pulse on both
sides of the band; do not cut off blood circulation entirely.
Do not use a band around fingers, toes, head, neck, or
trunk. Splint the area as for a fracture.
For abrasions (cuts and scrapes), clean, disinfect, and
cover the wound. Blisters form when skin is irritated, usually
by friction or heat. A hot spot signals the start of a blister.
Stop immediately and protect the tender area by covering the
hot spot with a piece of moleskin or moleskin foam. If a blister
forms, build up several layers of this covering, as needed, to
take off the pressure. Blisters are best left unbroken. Treat a bro-
ken blister as you would a minor cut or abrasion.
A sprain, caused by a twisting, wrenching, or lifting move-
ment, tears or stretches tissues surrounding a joint. The area
will feel tender to the touch, and you will feel sudden pain
when you move, so try to keep still. Elevate the area and apply
a cold compress for 15 to 20 minutes. For persistent or severe
pain, seek medical attention.
Rattlesnake
Even climbers with perfect technique can suffer scrapes and cuts.
Wrapping the hands with cloth tape (athletic or coach’s tape) can give
some protection. Your climbing instructor can show you how to tape your
fingers and hands. Here, the back of the hand and knuckles are protected,
while the palm is mostly left open.
1
2
3
4


CLIMBING 31
.Risk Management and First Aid
Fractures, or broken bones, can be either closed (simple)
or open (compound). In a simple fracture, the skin is not punc-
tured. In a compound fracture caused by a climbing incident,
there is a wound through the skin where the bone is broken.
If you suspect a fracture, do not try to move the injured area
to test for pain. Look for these other signs:
1. Tenderness to the touch over the site of the break. It hurts
when you press gently on the skin over the fracture.
2. Swelling or bluish color at the fracture site.
3. An unusual or abnormal shape, position, or movement of
the bone or joint.
4. A grating sound or feeling.
5. An inability to move the injured limb.
6. The victim may have heard or felt a bone snap.
A compound fracture will show the signs above in addition
to an open wound.
Altitude Sickness, or Acute
Mountain Sickness
If you are climbing in a mountainous area and aren’t
used to the high elevation, the thin air, which contains
less oxygen than areas closer to sea level, may leave
you short of breath and tired. You might develop a
headache and suffer from nausea. As a quick fix for
AMS, or acute mountain sickness, immediately descend
to a lower elevation. Give your body time to adapt to
higher altitudes by ascending gradually. After hiking
upward during the day, descend to a lower camp for
a good night’s rest. For more information about AMS,
see the Fieldbook.





CLIMBING 33
.Climbing Smart: The Where and When
Climbing Smart:
The Where and When
Good training, safety awareness, and common sense will let
you enjoy climbing for many years. Taking chances may bring
your climbing days to a quick end. Experienced climbers take
pride in climbing smart, and so can you.
A big part of climbing smart is knowing when not to do it.
Don’t climb alone. If you fall and are hurt, you will need the
help of others to give first aid and contact rescuers. Don’t go
climbing unless you are with qualified instructors who can
belay you and teach you the skills you need. Don’t go climbing
unless you have the proper equipment.
Before you go climbing, discuss your plans with your Scout
leader, parents, guardian, or other responsible adults. They may
approve of your idea or suggest changes in your plan.
Sometimes it might be best to put off climbing and enjoy some
other kind of adventure.
Always think about the “what if.” You might be tempted
during a campout to climb a cliff. But first, ask yourself some
“what if” questions. What if I fall and am injured? What if I
can’t get down? “What if” questions can help you climb smart,
even if that means not climbing at all.
Where to Climb and Rappel
At one time, serious climbing was done only in the mountains.
Today, however, you can find climbing areas and opportunities
just about anywhere throughout the country.


34 CLIMBING
Climbing Smart: The Where and When.
Rock Faces
The handholds and footholds on steep cliffs, mountainsides,
and canyon walls have long attracted climbers. Trees, boulders,
rock outcroppings, or specialized bolts driven into rock serve as
anchor points for belay and rappel ropes. Rock faces offer a
wide variety of opportunities, levels of difficulty, and spectacu-
lar scenery. Some cliffs have lots of nubs, ledges, and cracks to
help climbers on their way. Other rock faces are smoother and
more challenging.
Natural climbing areas can be found in many Scout camps,
in state and national parks, and on public lands. Other inviting
rock faces are on private property. Always get permission from
property owners or land managers before setting out on a climb,
and follow any guidelines the public agency or private land-
owner might require.
Safety Pointers
for Climbing Smart
• Never climb alone.
• Learn from the experts.
• Use the proper equipment.
• Stay within your abilities.
• Don’t hurry.
• Keep your mind on what you are doing.
Stay focused.
• Climb no higher than having your feet
shoulder-height above the ground unless
you are belayed with a rope.
• When climbing lower than the height
requiring a belay, have two spotters in
position to help protect you from injury
if you fall.


CLIMBING 35
.Climbing Smart: The Where and When
Artificial Walls
In recent years, outdoor climbing walls have been built in many
of America’s city parks and Scout camps. These walls often are
constructed from sheets of plywood with handholds bolted in
place, or formed from concrete embedded with small rocks that
serve as holds for hands and feet. Metal rings set into the tops
of the walls provide anchors for belay ropes. The base may be
surrounded with a bed of wood chips, gravel, or shredded rub-
ber to help cushion the landing of a climber coming off the wall.
A growing number of schools, climbing clubs, and climb-
ing gyms have indoor walls that challenge climbers of all levels.
Handholds of different shapes create climbs of varying difficulty.
The handholds can be moved around to provide climbers with
fresh routes.
Checking the Safety of a Climbing Area
The temperature, lighting, and stability of an indoor climbing
wall can be controlled as easily as the conditions in any sports
gym. However, most climbing areas are outdoors, where condi-
tions can vary. Before beginning, take a few minutes to evaluate
the safety of the place you want to climb. Here are some factors
to consider.
Belay ropes anchored above the walls protect climbers as they practice their moves.


36 CLIMBING
Climbing Smart: The Where and When.
Rock
The kind of rock in an area can make a big difference in climb-
ing safety. In general, hard rock such as granite offers climbers
the best surfaces. Sandstone and other softer rock, or rock that
is fractured or layered, such as shale, may crumble or slide
away under a climber’s weight. Even the hardest rock may have
pieces that can come loose.
Approach every handhold and foothold carefully; until you
have tested a hold and found it to be sound, assume that it will
pull out. Look above the climbing area, too, to see what might
be waiting to fall. Stay away from faces that are beneath lean-
ing pinnacles or hanging boulders. Listen for the sound of small
stones bouncing down the rock—a sign that there is unstable
material above.
Be alert for storm
clouds, which can
blossom suddenly.
Don’t climb when
it is stormy
or raining.
Lightning Strikes
If you can hear thunder,
you are close enough to
the storm to be struck by
lightning. Here are some
precautions to take.
• Avoid open areas and
lightning targets (trees,
flagpoles, wire fences).
• Avoid contact with any-
thing metal (carabiners
and other metal climbing
devices; metal-framed
backpacks and tents).
• If you are near a mountaintop, get downhill. If a storm catches you,
take shelter in a cave or low spot in an area that is not likely to flood.
• Seek out a steel-framed building or hard-topped motor vehicle (not a
convertible) if you can, and avoid touching the metal parts. Avoid water.
Avoid using or any contact with electronic devices (GPS receivers,
mobile phones).
• If you cannot find shelter, get small. Crouch low with only the
soles of your shoes touching the ground, and at least 100 feet from
your companions.


CLIMBING 37
.Climbing Smart: The Where and When
Weather
Stay off rock faces when it is raining. Water will make climbing
surfaces slippery. Wet ropes can be difficult for belayers to hold,
and climbing equipment that has become wet or even damp
must be dried before you store it. Make sure that at least one
adult leader is currently trained in Hazardous Weather training
at my.scouting.org.
Storms can develop quickly and catch you off guard if
you have not been watching the sky. Some rock faces are near
ridgetops that may be the targets of lightning, though lightning
also can hit locations deep in valleys. Carabiners and other metal
climbing hardware can conduct electrical currents from lightning
strikes, as can wet rope. At the first signs of bad weather or light-
ning, stop climbing and retreat to a safe location.
Safety on Edges
Cliff or rock edges can be hazardous because of the possibility of falling
or of knocking stones loose and sending them down toward people
below. Anyone standing or working within 8 feet of an edge where a fall
of more than 6 feet could occur must be tied in to a belay, an anchor, or a
safety line. Before climbing or rappelling activities begin, instructors
should make sure cliff edges are clean, carefully removing as much loose
material as is practical to make the edge usable.


38 CLIMBING
Clothing and Equipment.
Clothing and Equipment
For the most part, any clothing that is comfortable, rugged, and
suitable for the weather will be fine for climbing. Pants, shorts,
and shirts should let you move freely as you stretch to reach
handholds and footholds, but not so baggy that folds of cloth can
catch on rock outcroppings or tangle in belay or rappel systems.
What you wear on your feet can make a big difference in
how well you can climb. Avoid shoes with slick soles. Tightly
laced athletic shoes are fine for learning the basics. As you
become more skilled, you may want to try shoes made especially
for rock climbing. They will allow you to feel the rock with your
toes and twist your feet to fit into cracks. The sticky rubber
of the flexible soles will help you grip tiny footholds.
For climbing, wear clothing that lets
you move freely but is not baggy.
Climbing shoes


.Clothing and Equipment
Climbing shoes fit very tightly to help prevent your feet from
turning inside them. That support can give you better balance
as you stand on small footholds.
Rappellers can wear gloves with leather
palms to prevent friction burns while they are
handling the rope. The gloves must be dry and
fit well.
Tie back long hair and tuck it into your
helmet or into the back of your shirt so it
won’t become tangled with ropes, belay or
rappel devices, or carabiners. If you wear
glasses, consider using a strap to keep them
from slipping off.
For your first climbs as a beginner, you
won’t need to take much with you. Eventually,
however, if you become skilled enough and
want to climb in remote areas, you will need
a sturdy daypack or backpack to carry your
first-aid kit, compass, map, food, water, flash-
light, pocketknife, sun protection, waterproof
matches, clothing for protection from wind
and rain, and other items necessary for
climbs conducted far from a road.
Before climbing,
rappelling, or
belaying, remove
belt buckles,
wristwatches,
rings, and any
other jewelry.
Climbing helmet features. The helmet
should be properly fitted and adjusted.
OUTER
SHELL
INNER
CORE
PADDING
NAPE
STRAPS
CHIN
STRAP
DRIP
FLANGE
HEADLAMP
MOUNT VENTILATION
HOLES
HEADBAND
ADJUSTER


40 CLIMBING
Clothing and Equipment.
Whenever you are climbing, rappelling, or belaying on
rock faces, wear a helmet that has been specifically designed
for climbing. A helmet will protect your head against stones
and debris falling from above, and may prevent injuries if you
collide with a rock face during a fall. A chin strap helps keep a
climber’s helmet from falling off or shifting.
Rope
Rope is the lifeline of climbing. Before the 1940s, the best rope
available was manila rope, made by twisting together tough,
stringy fibers of the manila plant. However, manila rope may
rot if it remains wet for long periods.
Manila rope is also static, which means it stretches very
little. A falling climber belayed by a manila rope will be yanked
to an instant stop. This can put excessive strain on the rope,
the anchors, and the climber’s body, often causing damage to
equipment and/or possibly injury.
After the invention of nylon in the 1930s, manufacturers
developed ropes that are dynamic, meaning they will stretch.
A dynamic rope stops a falling climber gradually rather than
all at once, which reduces the shock on the rope and anchor
system and helps the climber avoid injury.
The helmets, hardware, and ropes used for climbing,
rappelling, and belaying have been developed
over more than 150 years of mountaineering.
The UIAA (Union Internationale des Associations
d’Alpinisme) is a group of mountain-travel
experts who set standards and testing procedures
for climbing equipment. The CE (Conformité
Européenne, which translates to European Commu-
nity) maintains similar standards for excellence. All
ropes, harnesses, helmets, and hardware used by
Scouts for climbing, rappelling, and belaying must be
specifically designed for climbing. Wear a properly fitted
helmet when climbing above shoulder height whether
you are on a rock face, tower, or artificial wall. When
using an indoor climbing gym, the climbing facility’s
procedures apply.


CLIMBING 41
Today, the only rope approved for climbing
and rappelling activities is kernmantle climbing rope with
a core of parallel or braided nylon strands (the kern)
surrounded by a woven sheath (the mantle). When
new, static rope must have a breaking strength of at least
22.2 kilonewtons (5,000 pounds). Climbing ropes must
be dry and treated with care before storage.
Rope Inspection
Your life and the safety of those climbing with you may depend
upon your rope being in good condition. Climbing ropes are
very strong but they can be damaged. Before each day’s climbs
begin, perform an inch-by-inch hand and eye inspection of any
rope you plan to use. Search for cuts or abrasions, fraying,
puffs of fiber, soft or hard spots, lumps, stains, or fused areas
that are smooth and slick. Tie a figure eight on a bight in one
end of a rope to indicate that it has been inspected.
Do not use any rope that shows signs of damage. Bring it
to the attention of climbing instructors and directors. They will
remove the rope from service and, if necessary, retire an unsafe
rope by cutting it into pieces no longer than 15 feet.
Construction of a kernmantle rope with its woven
sheath (the mantle) over a braided core (the kern)
After a rope has passed inspection, tie a figure eight on a bight in
one end.
MANTLE
OUTER
SHEATH
KERN
CORE STRAND.


42 CLIMBING
Clothing and Equipment.
You can wash a rope to remove dirt and rock crystals that
might shorten its useful life. Wash a badly soiled rope by hand
or in a front-loading washing machine with cool water and a
mild laundry soap that does not contain bleach. When using a
washing machine, place the rope in a large net bag first so there
is no danger of rope ends becoming entangled in the washing
machine mechanism. Thoroughly rinse the rope, then air-dry it
completely (out of direct sunlight, and don’t use a dryer) before
using the rope again or putting it into storage. Be patient—it
may take several days for a rope to dry.
Rope Care
The following guidelines will help you protect a
climbing rope from damage.
• Never step on a rope or drag it along the ground.
Dirt and tiny bits of sand can cut the sheath and may
even penetrate to the core and weaken the rope.
• Never pull a rope over a sharp edge, especially if it
is bearing weight. Route the rope away from sharp
edges and narrow cracks that might cut it, or protect
the rope by placing canvas pieces between the rope
and the rock.
• Protect rope from heat.
• Never allow a rope to run over another rope or a
piece of nylon webbing. Friction between the two can
harm the stationary webbing or rope, and perhaps
wear through it.
• Never leave a rope stretched or under tension for
extended periods of time.
• If possible, keep rope dry. Before putting it into storage,
let wet rope air-dry in a place safe from direct sunlight.
• Keep rope away from chemicals and petroleum
products, which can erode and weaken nylon.
• Prolonged exposure to sunlight damages nylon
rope. Don’t leave rope out in the sun any longer
than necessary.


CLIMBING 43
.Clothing and Equipment
Coiling or Bagging a Rope
A typical climbing rope is 50 meters (165 feet) long. Coiling or
bagging a rope keeps it in a neat package that is easy to carry
and store. You can also loosen a coiled or bagged rope without
its becoming a tangled mess. This is especially important when
throwing a rope down a cliff for a belay or rappel.
Begin a coil by removing any knots and hardware from the
rope. Starting about 10 feet in from one end, drape lengths of
the rope over the back of your neck so that
the loops hang down below your waist.
When you are about 10 feet from the
other end, remove the loops from your
neck, grasp the two ends of the rope, and
wrap them several times around the coil.
Thread a bend of the remaining rope
lengths through the coil, then pass the ends
through the bend and pull it snug. For a
convenient way to carry a coil, some climb-
ers leave enough of the two ends to place
them over their shoulders and around the
coil, then tie the ends around the waist.
This is called the butterfly coil.
A rope can also be “stuffed” into a rope
bag by pushing it into the bag one arm’s
length at a time. When all of the rope has
been stuffed into the bag, the end of the
rope is attached to the rope bag drawstring
or a loop sewn into the bag. When ready to
use the rope again just grab the end and pull it out.
As you coil a rope, drape lengths of it around your neck.
Butterfly coil


44 CLIMBING
Clothing and Equipment.
Storing Rope
To store a rope overnight or for a few days, coil it or bag it and
put it in a safe place that is dry, clean, cool, and shady.
For|longer storage, make sure the rope is dry and stowed away
from sunlight, heat sources, petroleum products, chemicals, or
dirty areas. Do not store a rope in the trunk of a car, where heat,
battery acid, or other chemicals could damage the rope. (See also
“Storing Equipment” later in this chapter.)
It is best to store or carry a rope in a rope bag. Some rope bags are stuff sacks.
Others open up to include a tarp that protects the rope from sand and dirt.


CLIMBING 45
.Clothing and Equipment
Throwing a Rope Down a Cliff
Climbers can waste a remarkable amount of time
untangling ropes that have been improperly thrown.
For orderly rope handling, follow these steps.
• Secure one end of the rope. It should be clipped into
an anchor, or simply grasped tightly, but it must be
held in some way.
• Shout “Rope!” and then wait a moment. This
standard signal warns anyone below to be alert for
falling rope. If for some reason the rope should not
be thrown, someone should immediately shout that
information up to the person holding the rope.
• If the rope has been coiled, loosen any loops used
to hold the coils together. Split the coil in half. Toss
the half closest to the anchor first and, once it has
straightened itself, toss the other half down the cliff.


46 CLIMBING
Clothing and Equipment.
Carabiners
Carabiners are the essential connectors of belay and rappel
systems. They are used to attach climbers, rappellers, and
belayers to ropes and anchors, and to clip together ropes and
runners, or loops of webbing. (See “Webbing” in this chapter.)
Most carabiners are made of aluminum alloy or high-grade
steel. A spring-loaded gate on one side allows a carabiner
to be snapped onto a rope or piece of webbing. Carabiners have
a variety of shapes: oval, D-shaped, and pear-shaped (also
called HMS).
Locking carabiners have a sleeve that you screw or twist
with your fingers to lock the gate closed (take care not to over-
tighten the sleeve). With double-locking carabiners, a climber
must twist and pull the gate to open it; this system provides
added protection against an accidental opening. Carabiners
should be oriented with the gate down. When two nonlocking
carabiners are used together, the gates should be reversed so
that when they are pressed open the gates form an “X.” This
helps prevent both from being unintentionally opened at the
same time.
Inspect carabiners for any signs of damage or wear. Make
sure the gates work smoothly and close cleanly. Do not drop
carabiners on hard surfaces, drag them along the ground, or
otherwise mistreat them. Grooves worn into the metal by
friction from ropes can weaken a carabiner. Retire from use
any carabiners that have become significantly grooved or bent,
or that have been dropped from a significant height onto a
hard surface.
Nonlocking
oval
Always use
nonlocking
carabiners in pairs,
with the gates
of the carabiners
reversed.
Locking D-shaped
The locking carabiner
helps protect against
accidental opening.
Carabiners should
be used so
that the load
is distributed
along the ends
of the oval,
the strongest
alignment. Never
load the carabiner
along its gate,
and avoid
cross-loading
(twisting the load
across the gate),
which could force
the gate open.
Nonlocking
D-shaped
Locking
pear-shaped


CLIMBING 47
Webbing
Webbing designed for climbing is available in a
variety of sizes, lengths, and materials such as
nylon, Spectra, and Dyneema. Tubular
webbing (usually 1") is used to form tied-seat
harnesses; for anchors used by belayers and
rappellers; and for other uses in climbing,
rappelling, and belaying. A piece of webbing
can be tied into a loop known as a runner
with a water knot. Webbing can be purchased
as a runner or sling and is pre-sewn by the
manufacturer. Climbers use runners—or
slings, as these loops are also called—for
rigging anchors, managing rope, and many other tasks.
Like all climbing rope, all webbing can be
harmed by friction, dirt, and long exposure to
sunlight or harsh weather. Dispose of webbing
that shows any sign of damage or that has an
unknown history.
Storing Equipment
Take time to store equipment correctly so that it will
last longer and be in good shape the next time you
want to use it. First, remove all webbing and ropes
from anchor points. That will prevent gear from
being left out in the elements and will ensure that
the next climbers and rappellers set their own
anchors with equipment they know to be reliable.
Coil each rope or stow it in a stuff sack. Carabiners
and other hardware can be clipped together, snapped
onto a loop of webbing, or stored in duffel bags.
Inspect runners and harnesses, too. Destroy and
dispose of any equipment that might pose a
danger; store the rest in duffel bags.
Gear slings or short lengths of webbing
can be used to help organize climbing gear.
Tubular webbing
Belayers use tubular webbing to
anchor themselves securely.


48 CLIMBING
Clothing and Equipment.
Rope and gear that have gotten wet must be dried
completely before storage. Uncoil wet rope and drape it loosely
and out of direct sunlight so that air can get to it. Hang damp
slings and harnesses from rustproof hooks.
Always take time to store equipment properly so that it
will provide better safety and longer service.
Directors and instructors at climbing areas may ask you
to help fill out the detailed records that are kept to track
the history of each rope and piece of equipment. Those
records are an important tool for making sure that only
ropes and gear in top condition are used during climbing
and rappelling activities. Users should be aware of which
ropes and other gear endured hard falls; this information
must be noted in the written histories of the equipment
and factored into equipment retirement decisions.
If you notice any damage to a rope or
piece of equipment, immediately “retire”
it so that it cannot be used again. Cut a
damaged rope into 15-foot or shorter
lengths that can then be used for knot-tying practice
or disposed of in the trash.


R o p e a n d eq u i p m e n t R e c o R d
Photocopy this form and use it to maintain a record throughout the life of each rope used in Scouting America climbing/rappelling activities.
Purchased from (supplier) _______________________________________________________________ Brand _______________________________ Purchase date _______________
Identifying marking ______________ Date of manufacture ____________________ Color ___________________________________ Length ________________________________
Diameter ________________________ Type (dynamic or static) __________________ Date placed in service ___________________ Assigned use __________________________
Inspect rope for damage or excessive wear each time it is used and again after each use. Immediately retire and properly dispose of all suspect ropes.
Date Used Location Type of Use Sun Exposure
(No. of hours)
No. of
Falls/Severity
(Record under
rope condition)
Length of
Time Used Date Inspected Inspector’s
Initials
Rope Condi-
tion and Com-
ments
No. of
Participant
Uses


50 CLIMBING
Knots.
Knots
Rope is such an important part of climbing and rappelling that
you shouldn’t be surprised to discover that tying knots is a
basic skill all climbers must learn. A good way to learn
climbers’ and other knots is to carry a 2-foot piece of parachute
cord in your pocket. When you have spare time—while waiting
for a bus, for example—you can pull out the cord and run
through your collection of knots.
Practice tying knots before you go climbing. Continue
practicing so that the knots become natural to your fingers
and you can tie them almost without thinking. You should be
able to tie all of the basic climbers’ knots quickly and neatly
with your eyes closed, especially if you plan to go on to more
advanced Class 5 climbing.


CLIMBING 51
.Knots
Figure Eight on a Bight
Forming a bight, or bend in a
rope, and then tying a figure-
eight knot with it gives you a
loop that will not slip or come
loose. Snap a carabiner into the
loop, and the rope can be
attached to an anchor sling.
Figure Eight Follow-Through
This is the same knot as the figure eight on a bight, but with an
important difference. The figure eight on a bight must be tied in
a rope before it is attached to a carabiner, while the figure eight
follow-through is tied directly to a harness.
Begin a figure eight follow-through by tying a loose figure-
eight knot in a rope (steps 1 through 4 in the above illustration).
Run the end of the rope through the climbing harness or the
device to which you want to attach it (step 5). Then trace the
end of the rope back through the figure-eight knot in the
opposite direction (the “follow through,” steps 6 through 8).
1
2
3
1 2 3 4 5
6 7 8


52 CLIMBING
Knots.
Water Knot
A water knot can be used to tie together the ends of a piece of
1-inch tubular webbing to make a runner for use in anchors,
and to tie some seat harnesses. The water knot seldom slips
once it has been tightened by weight, but it can be very difficult
to untie after being tightened.
Tie an overhand knot in one end of the tubular webbing
(step 1), leaving at least a 6-inch tail. With the other end of the
webbing, trace the first end all the way back through the
overhand knot (steps 2 and 3), again leaving at least a 6-inch
tail. Straighten the knot so that the webbing surfaces lie flat
against one another, then pull it as tight as possible (step 4).
1 2
3
4


CLIMBING 53
.Knots
1 2 3 4
Prusik Knot
The Prusik knot secures a loop of smaller rope or accessory cord to a
climbing rope in such a way that it can be slid along the rope, but when
it is loaded will bend the rope and hold securely. The knot is commonly
tied with accessory cord by a climber to ascend a rope or to secure a
belay system in order to release the belayer.
1 2 3 4 5
Double Fisherman’s Knot (Grapevine Knot)
For tying together the ends of two ropes, the most reliable knot
is the double fisherman’s knot. It can also be used to secure
the ends of a piece of cord to form a runner. Half of a double
fisherman’s knot (also known as a barrel knot) can be used as
a stopper knot at the end of a rope.
Lay about 2 feet of the ends of two ropes alongside one
another, ends opposite. Loosely loop one rope end twice around
the other, then thread the end of that rope through the loops.
Repeat the process with the second rope end. Carefully tighten
the two parts of the knot, then slide them against each other.
If they don’t fit together neatly, the knot is incorrectly tied.


54 CLIMBING
Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems.
Harnesses, Anchors,
and Belay Systems
The protection system in climbing combines harnesses, ropes,
carabiners, anchors, and an alert partner (the belayer) to stop
any fall of a climber or rappeller.
Harnesses
A harness gives climbers, rappellers, and belayers a way to
attach themselves safely and reliably to ropes and belay anchors.
In a fall, a harness will distribute a person’s weight in several
directions, which can be safer than if the person had a belay
rope tied directly around the waist. A properly fitted harness
will place the waistband above the hip bones. Once tightened,
it will snugly hold the participant so that the harness can’t
move up or down.
A harness that will not stay above a participant’s hip bones
may not hold the person if the participant becomes inverted.
The addition of a chest harness or a full-body harness can
remedy this.
When using a commercial harness,
always double-check to make sure
you have secured the end of the belt
according to the manufacturer’s
specifications. For most harnesses,
that includes threading the belt back
through the buckle. Remember, “O”
is open; “C” is closed.
Make sure you
follow the
manufacturer’s
recommendations
when tying or
clipping into
the harness
for climbing,
rappelling, and
belaying. Some
harnesses have
distinct methods
of attachment for
different activities.


CLIMBING 55
.Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems
Commercial Harnesses
Commercially made climbing harnesses usually require only that
you put your legs through leg loops and then secure the waist
strap with a buckle. The leg loops of some harnesses can be
adjusted; you should just be able to slip two fingers between the
loop and your thigh. If the harnesses available to you are not
adjustable, you will need to choose one that fits your body snugly
but not tight enough to restrict circulation.
Tied Harnesses
A 30-foot length of nylon tubular webbing can be wrapped
around your body and tied in special ways to form a reliable
tied harness for climbing, rappelling, and belaying. While not
as convenient as a commercially made climbing harness, tied
harnesses are used in some climbing areas for reasons of
economy and to increase the participant’s sense of
accomplishment. Each tied harness must be tied exactly right
every time to ensure your safety. There-fore, you must learn
how to tie a seat harness from a qualified instructor. Once you
have mastered tying one of these types of seat harnesses, you
can use the following descriptions as reminders of the
correct methods.
Using a harness that fits properly helps
make climbing and rappelling safer, more
comfortable, and fun.
Tied harness
FIGURE EIGHT
FOLLOW-THROUGH
WATER KNOTOVERHAND
KNOT


56 CLIMBING
Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems.
How to Tie a Seat Harness
Tie the seat harness using a piece of webbing 24 to 30 feet long.
Step 1—Drape the center of the webbing behind your neck.
Step 2—Step over the ends of the webbing and bring them around the
sides of your hips, taking care not to allow any portions of the webbing
to cross or twist. Pull the webbing snug.
Step 3—Pass the webbing ends behind and then through the lengths of
webbing lying against your lower torso.
Step 4—Slip the webbing off your neck.
Step 5—As you pull out the slack, the bight that had been around your
neck will become the horizontal band between the loops of webbing that
have formed around your legs.
Step 6—Going first behind your back, wrap the remaining lengths of
webbing around your waist in this fashion:
Step 6a—The piece originally in your right hand goes clockwise.
Step 6b—The piece originally in your left hand goes counterclockwise.
1 2 3
4 5 6


CLIMBING 57
.Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems
Step 7—Continue wrapping until only about 3 feet remains at each end
of webbing. Keep the webbing flat and snug against your body.
Step 8—Tuck the end of the counterclockwise webbing beneath the
sling on your left hip. (You will need it in a moment to finish tying a
water knot.)
Step 9—With the end of the clockwise webbing, tie a loose overhand knot
(half of a water knot) around the wraps of webbing on your right hip.
Step 10—Retrieve the other end of the webbing and use it to trace back
through the loose overhand knot, thus completing a water knot.
Step 11—Tighten the water knot. Check the harness to be sure it fits
securely and that there are no unnecessary twists in the webbing. Wrap
any remaining length of webbing around your waist and tuck the end
under the previous wraps.
Step 12—Use a locking carabiner (double-locking preferred) to clip
together all the webbing between the knots in front of your body.
7 8 9
10 11 12


58 CLIMBING
Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems.
Anchors and Belay Systems
You have learned about harnesses, ropes, and carabiners.
Now let us look at two other essential parts of the protection
system: the anchors and the belay system.
Anchors
Choosing and rigging anchors for climbing or rappelling should
be left to experienced climbers who have special training in
establishing and monitoring anchor points and belay systems.
You can learn a lot from them as they explain the anchors that
you will be using for your climbs and rappels. They may even
ask you to assist in setting up or taking down anchoring sys-
tems. Here is some basic information you might learn.
To protect climbers and rappellers from injury, the system
that secures them must be attached to failproof anchor points—
boulders, sturdy trees, or other points that absolutely will not
give way. Every belay system must use multiple failproof
anchor points so that the entire system has redundancy,
or backup.
Trees should be at least 6 inches in diameter at the point
of anchor and firmly rooted. Boulders should be located so they
cannot be pulled out of position. Nuts, chocks, bolts, and other
forms of artificial protection are acceptable only if they have
been placed by qualified people.
Deciding where to place an anchor depends upon the way
it will be used. If a belayer will be at the top of a climb, it is
better to find an anchor 6 to 10 feet back from the edge of the
cliff. This will allow room for belayers to do their work and for
climbers completing their routes to move about without danger
of falling. Special care must be given to protect the rope from
sharp edges.
Never assume an existing anchor point is safe because
it has been used in the past. Check every anchor every
time you intend to use it. Webbing and rope left on-site
by previous climbing parties may have been damaged
by heavy use or exposure to the elements. Replace
anything you find that was left attached to an anchor
with equipment you know to be in top condition.


CLIMBING 59
.Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems
Belaying a climber from below. Here is how to set up a belay system using a tree
at the top of a cliff as the top anchor point, and a tree at the base of the cliff as the
belayer’s anchor point. Make the anchor webbing long enough to allow the carabiners
securing the rope to the top anchor to hang over the edge of the cliff. That helps
prevent the rope from being abraded, or scraped.
TOP ANCHOR POINTS
WATER KNOTS
WEBBING
EDGE OF BLUFF
BELAY ROPE
TO CLIMBERTO BELAYER
EDGE PROTECTION
BASKET
HITCH
FIGURE EIGHT
FOLLOW THROUGH
BOTTOM
ANCHOR POINT
TIED TO CLIMBER’S HARNESS
ATTACHED TO BELAY ROPE
AND BELAYER’S HARNESS


60 CLIMBING
Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems.
Runners or ropes must be correctly attached to anchors to
safeguard the lives of climbers, rappellers, and belayers. Always
follow the guidance of a climbing area’s instructors when select-
ing and rigging anchor points. Make sure rope does not run over
any edges that could abrade or cut it. Don’t let carabiners under
tension lie against edges where they could be damaged.
Belay Systems
A belay system provides protec-
tion to climbers and rappellers
whenever their feet are higher
than shoulder-height above the
ground. If they slip, the belayer
can help guard them from injury
by quickly stopping the fall.
Climbers and rappellers can be
belayed either from above or
from below with a top-rope
belay. (Study the photos and
illustrations in this section to
see how the setups differ for
each method.)
A cordelette anchor system divides the force of a load among
several anchor points.
In a top-rope belay, a climber is protected by a
belay rope anchored at the top of a climb. The
belayer may be at the top or bottom of the cliff.
Whenever
possible, use
one or more
backup anchors.
If the primary
anchors fail, the
backups can
keep you safe.
All anchors
must be failproof
or backed up
and the load
distributed
as equally
as possible.


CLIMBING 61
.Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems
The belay rope passes through a belay device—a piece of
hardware shaped to increase a belayer’s control over the rate at
which a rope will move through the device. Friction plays an
important role. More friction between a rope and a belay device
means a slower descent for a climber or rappeller. Less friction
allows the rope to move more quickly. Most belay devices are
easy to use and highly reliable. A belayer does not need great
strength to stop the fall of a climber or rappeller.
Prepare to belay a climber or rappeller by putting on a
climbing harness and attaching yourself to the belay system
with a locking carabiner. The belay should be set up so that
the belay device is directly connected to the anchor system.
The belayer clips into the anchor system. Make sure you are in
line with your anchor system and the direction of pull on the
rope in the event of a fall. This will prevent your being yanked
out of position.
Belay and rappel
devices apply
friction to the
rope, allowing
its speed to
be controlled.
An appropriate
commercially
made belay or
rappel device
with a locking
carabiner must be
used. The belayer
must have had
prior training or
experience using
the specific type
of device.
Bottom belay system setup A belayer properly anchored for
a bottom belay


62 CLIMBING
Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems.
Always follow the guidance of a climbing area’s instructors
regarding the belaying technique to be used and the way you
anchor yourself to act as belayer. Another acceptable variation
is to anchor a belayer on the ground with a second belayer
tightly gripping the first belayer’s harness and using body
weight to keep the first belayer in place.
BELAYING A CLIMBER
After you are connected to a belay system, insert a bend of
the belay rope into the belay device. Use a locking carabiner
to secure the bend of rope and the keeper loop of the device to
your harness or directly to an anchor system.
The preferred method is using a direct connection to the
belay anchor, rather than having the belayer hooked to the
anchor, thus becoming part of the anchor.
BELAY ROPE
BACKUP BELAYER
BELAYER
ANCHOR PERSON
HOLDS CARABINER
IN REAR OF HARNESS
HELMET TO BE
WORN AT ALL
TIMES BY ACTIVE
PARTICIPANTS
SEE TIED-SEAT HARNESS
WITH SINGLE CARABINER FOR
ANCHOR PERSON TO GRASP


CLIMBING 63
.Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems
Arrange the rope so that your stronger hand (usually your
right hand if you are right-handed) will be the brake hand—the
hand closest to the free end of the rope. Your other hand will be
the guide hand, resting on that part of the rope leading
to the climber or rappeller. (Specialized belay devices such
as the Grigri are set up a little differently. Refer to the
manufacturer’s guidelines.)
Double-check the belay system to be sure it is correctly
anchored and that the belay device is ready. Exchange verbal
signals (see the boxed text later in this chapter) with a climber.
As the climber ascends, pull through the belay device any slack
that forms in the rope, and let the loose rope pile up next to your
feet. While holding the rope firmly with your brake hand, slide
your guide hand out along the rope. Then clasp both sections of
the rope with the fingers and thumb of your guide hand so that
you can slide your brake hand back along the rope toward your
body. (Your brake hand must never leave the rope.) Repeat the
process. Keeping slack in the rope to a minimum will limit the
length of a fall if the climber slips.
Running the rope through a belay device
allows a belayer to stop a fall easily, just
by moving the belay rope to one side.
Tube device Grigri


64 CLIMBING
Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems.
Verbal Signals for Climbers and Belayers
Verbal signals allow a climber and a belayer to communicate and work
together as a team even if they cannot see each other. Get in the habit of
using verbal signals every time you are climbing or belaying. If the day
is too windy or the area too noisy for climbers and belayers to hear one
another clearly, postpone your climbs or move to another area.
Climber Belayer Meaning
“On belay?” “Is the belay ready?”
“Belay on.” “Your belay is ready.”
“Climbing.” “Here I come.”
“Climb” or
“Climb on.” “Come ahead.”
“Slack.” “I need some slack in the rope.”
“Up rope.” “Take in the loose rope.”
“Falling!” “I’m falling! Brake the belay rope!”
“Tension.” “Hold the rope tightly in case I fall.”
“Got you.” “There’s tension on the rope.”
“Ready to lower.” “Lower me.”
“Lowering.” “I’m letting you down now.”
“Rock!” “Rock!” “Look out for falling objects.”
“Rope!” “Rope!” “Rope being thrown down.”
“Off belay.” “I’m in a safe place and no longer
need a belay.”
“Belay off.” “I’m no longer belaying you.”


CLIMBING 65
.Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems
BELAYING A RAPPELLER
Everyone must be belayed. This might be an independent top-
rope belay. Or it could be a fireman’s belay at the bottom of the
rappel rope. For an independent belay, begin by double-
checking the belay system to be sure it is secure, you are
properly anchored, and the belay device is correctly set. The
bulk of the belay rope should be loosely piled next to you on
your brake-hand side. Exchange verbal signals with the
rappeller. As the rappeller descends, the belayer gradually
releases the belay rope through the belay device.
Verbal Signals for Rappellers and Belayers
Rappeller Belayer Meaning
“On belay?” “Is the belay ready?”
“Belay on.” “Your belay is ready.”
“Rappelling.” “I’m ready to start down.”
“Rappel on.” “Go ahead.”
“Falling!” “I’m falling! Brake the rope!”
“Off belay.” “I’m done rappelling and
am in a safe place.”
“Belay off.” “I’m no longer belaying you.”
“Off rappel” or The rope is free of hardware and
“Off rope.” is ready for the next rappeller.
A shout of “Rock!” may be the most important climbing
signal. It warns everyone that there is immediate
danger from something—any object—falling. If you
hear this signal, don’t look up. Protect yourself in the
most efficient way—take refuge under a ledge, move
quickly to the left or right, or become “small” under
your helmet. Yells of “Rock! Rock! Rock!” warn of
more danger than a single shout.


66 CLIMBING
Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems.
Safety Pointers for Belaying
Belaying is serious business. Every moment that you
are belaying someone, you must assume that the
person on the other end of the rope is about to fall.
Keep your attention focused at all times on the climber
or rappeller, and be ready to react instantly to hold the
rope and stop a fall. To ensure a safe belay every time,
remember these pointers.
• When using an independent rope belay, the belay
rope must be correctly anchored in order for
the belayer to maintain an effective stance to be
prepared to stop the fall of a climber or rappeller.
• The belay anchor system must be absolutely secure
and reliable, with no chance of failure.
• The belay device must be properly installed and the
belayer must understand how it is used.
• The belayer’s brake hand must never leave the rope.
• When using an independent rope belay or a
fireman’s belay, the belayer must anticipate the
direction of pull on the belay rope and get in line
with it to avoid being pulled out of position.
• The belayer must be ready at any moment to stop
a fall.
• The belayer and the climber or rappeller must
maintain good, clear communication.
• The belayer’s attention must never leave the climber
or rappeller.
For a fireman’s belay, the belayer is at the bottom of the
rappel. Exchange verbal signals with the rappeller. Hold onto
the rappel rope/ropes and apply downward pressure if the
rappeller needs assistance in controlling their descent.


CLIMBING 67
.Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems
COPE/Climbing
Safety CHECK
CLOTHING—No baggy clothing or loose jewelry;
hair is tied up or tucked in.
HARNESSES/HELMETS—Properly fitted helmets;
ropes properly attached; buckles on harnesses
properly secured.
ENVIRONMENT—Keep all program areas safe,
free from hazards and obstructions, and monitor
weather conditions.
CONNECTIONS—Check and double-check—make
sure anchor points are rigged properly, participants
are properly connected, and carabiners are screwed
down and locked.
KNOTS—Check that knots are properly tied and
dressed.


The basic climbing position is the three-point stance.


CLIMBING 69
.Climbing
Climbing
It’s time to climb. Begin by putting on a harness. Using a figure
eight follow-through knot, tie the belay rope directly into the
harness. Double-check your harness and the knots, then
exchange verbal signals with your belayer.
You are ready to start your ascent. The basic
climbing position is called the three-point stance.
This means you keep two hands and one foot on
reliable holds while moving the free foot to a new
location, or you keep both feet and one hand on
holds while the free hand moves. Lift yourself
with the strong muscles of the legs; use your
hands mostly for balance. Lean out from a
wall you are climbing so that your
body is vertical and your weight rests
on your feet. That will give you the
most secure stance as you ascend.
Beginning climbers are sometimes tempted to lean
into the rock as if to hug it, but that shifts their weight
and can cause their feet to slip off of holds. When your
body is too close to the rock, you may also find it
difficult to see where your feet are moving.
Tie the belay rope directly into the
harness, using a figure eight follow-
through knot. Work any slack out
of the safety knot.


70 CLIMBING
Climbing.
Footholds
The size and location of a hold will determine the way you
position your foot to take advantage of it. Decide how you will
use a hold before you begin moving your body. Place your foot
solidly on the hold and keep it still until you are ready to move
that foot to its next hold.
The foot techniques most often used are edging, smearing,
and jamming. Along with the rest step, these are the basic
moves for your feet.
Edging. Turn your foot sideways and place the edge of
the sole on a nub, narrow ledge, or other hold. You probably
will find it most natural to edge with the inside of the shoe,
although edging with the outer portion of the sole sometimes
makes possible a series of moves.
Smearing. First, place the sole of your shoe toe against the
rock. Then, as your foot bends and takes your weight, the rock
will dig into the surface of the sole and hold you, especially if
your body is vertical and your weight is directly over your feet.
The sticky rubber soles of modern climbing shoes are made for
this kind of traction. Both smearing and edging are harder to do
with hiking boots or athletic shoes.
Jamming. Fit your foot sideways into a crack in the rock and
twist your ankle so that your foot is in a more natural position.
Your foot should wedge tightly enough against the sides of the
crack to hold your weight.
Rest step. Use the rest step now and then to give your legs a
moment to recover between moves. Place your foot on a wide
hold, lock your knee, and let your weight settle onto your heel
so that your leg bones support you while your muscles relax. If
you have a free arm, shake it to restore circulation and give it
renewed energy.


CLIMBING 71
.Climbing
Jamming
Smearing
Edging


72 CLIMBING
Climbing.
Handholds
You can use your hands in different ways to take full
advantage of different shapes of cracks, ledges, and nubs on a
rock. Clings, jams, and underclings are among the most
common climbing holds.
Clings. Place your fingertips on the edge of a table, bend your
fingers at the second joints, and pull down with your wrist.
That’s a crimp hold, the most common way climbers hang onto
edges on rock faces. If a hold is small, you might cling to it with
only a couple of fingers.
Climbers
sometimes call a
big hold—using
all fingers and the
thumb—a bucket
or a jug because
it is like grabbing
the lip of a
large container.
Clings. 1. Open grip. 2. Crimp grip. 3. Fingertip grip. 4. Bucket
or jug grip.
1 2
3 4


CLIMBING 73
.Climbing
Fist jams
Finger jams
Hand jams
Jams. A crack in a wall might be just the right size for you to
fit in some or all of your hand. Arch your fingers or clench your
fist to tighten your hand in the crack.


74 CLIMBING
Underclings. If you are grasping a rock with your
palm up rather than down, the hold is an undercling.
An undercling works because your hands are pulling
one way while your feet are pushing the other. Use the
undercling to move sideways along a face, or for balance
as you search above for your next handhold.
Combination Holds
In certain situations, climbers rely on holds that are a
combination of handholds and careful foot placement.
Combination holds that you may find useful are mantling,
liebacks, chimneying, and counterbalance.
Mantling. With a mantling move, you can hoist yourself onto
a ledge or over the top of a wall or cliff. Climb high enough to
place a palm on the ledge. Push your body up by straightening
your arm, using your legs and your other arm as much as
possible. Lift a foot—not your knee—to the ledge, then stand
upright just as if you were getting out of a swimming pool.
Undercling. The hands pull one way while the feet
push the other way.
Mantling. 1. Approach the ledge. 2. Place a palm on the ledge
and cock your arm. 3. Push yourself up as you straighten your
arm. 4. Lift a foot to the ledge and stand, balancing your weight
over your foot.
.
1 2 3 4


CLIMBING 75
.Climbing
Liebacks. Use a lieback where two rock faces meet to form a
corner. With your hands, hold the crack where the walls join,
then push against either rock face with your feet. Moving one
foot or one hand at a time (while maintaining three-point
contact at all times), work your way up the route. Constant
pressure on your hands and feet will prevent you from falling.
Chimneying. If a crack in a rock face is wide enough—what
climbers call a chimney—you can press your back against one
side and your feet against the other, keeping your hands low
and pressing with the palms. Or you can press one foot and one
hand against each side. Move upward by “walking” up with
your feet and pushing with your hands against the sides
of the chimney. As you straighten your legs and push with
your hands, your back slides upward against one side of
the chimney.
Chimneying
Lieback


76 CLIMBING
Climbing.
Counterbalancing. A climber can sometimes extend a leg or
an arm to a position that does not offer a solid hold, but rather
provides balance during an ascent. Counterbalancing involves
the entire body, using position and weight distribution to make
the most of minimal holds.
Counterbalancing. 1. The left foot is extended to the side to
provide counterbalance. 2. The left foot is flagged in front of
the right for counterbalance.
Tips for Climbing
• Try to support most of your weight on your feet to
keep from tiring your hands and arms. Stretch for
high handholds only when necessary.
• Practice. Reading about climbing won’t build your
climbing skills; only practice (under the supervision
of a qualified instructor) can do that.
1 2


CLIMBING 77
.Climbing
Chalk. Advanced
rock climbers
sometimes use
chalk to help keep
their fingers and
palms dry and
improve their grip
on the rock. Kept
handy in a small
bag hung around
the climber’s
waist, the chalk is
the same kind that
gymnasts use.
Some climbing
areas discourage
its use but will
allow chalk that
is the same color
as the rock or
transparent. If
you try chalk, use
it lightly and only
when needed to
avoid affecting the
environment.
Rock face suitable for climbing
Crumbling and excessively fractured rock face
Planning Routes
Study a wall or rock face before you start climbing, and try to
figure out where your hands and feet will go. You will have a
better chance of putting together a smooth sequence of moves.
Experienced climbers call this “sequencing.” As you begin, look
ahead for the next two or three holds you can use.


78 CLIMBING
Climbing.
Climbing Down
Climbing down a cliff (called down-climbing) can be more
difficult than going up, because you might not be able to see
the holds as well. On gentle slopes, face out and lean forward
in a nose-over-toes position to keep your weight over your feet.
Turn sideways on steeper terrain. As you descend, keep at least
one hand on the rock for balance. On the steepest walls, face
the rock and use the three-point stance. Lean out to keep your
weight over your feet and to give yourself the best look at the
holds below.
Bouldering
Bouldering is a good way to learn climbing techniques.
Bouldering takes its name from climbers practicing their
moves on real boulders, but it can also be done on any face
that has handholds and footholds near the ground. The key to
bouldering is that climbers move up, down, and sideways
without ever getting any higher than they can jump down
without injury. Climbers often climb sideways, just above the
ground, for extended distances. Such traversing builds strength
and skill, where the goal is to not reach the top but to move
smoothly from one hold to the next.
Down-climbing. 1. Nose-over-toes on gentle slope. 2. Facing out. 3. Facing sideways.
4. Facing the rock. A helmet is needed anytime danger from falling rock or objects
exists. A rope and harness are needed whenever the climb exceeds the climber’s
comfort level.
1 2 3 4


CLIMBING 79
.Climbing
Bouldering can be done on
any face that has handholds
and footholds near the
ground on which climbers
can practice their moves.
Boulderers rely on spotters
(below) and crashpads to
be their “safety net” in
case of a fall.
Do not climb unroped more than shoulder-height above
the ground. If you want to climb higher, you must be on belay.
Even if you are climbing only a foot or two high, you must
have two or three spotters ready to steady you and provide
assistance if you fall. Crashpads are used to cushion falls.
Crashpads are foldable foam pads made specifically for
bouldering. Often several crashpads are used to protect the
climber when the ground surface is irregular.


80 CLIMBING
Climbing.
Spotting
Spotters stand ready to break a person’s fall in such a way
as to prevent injury either to the person who falls or to the
spotters. They are not expected to catch a falling boulderer in
midair—something that is impossible in most cases, even in
a fall of just a few feet. Instead, they support the head, neck,
and torso of the falling person and ease the boulderer to the
ground. To do this, spotters must
• Position themselves with their hands ready to support a faller,
keeping their hands out in front of them with their fingers
and thumbs together. Spotters should keep their feet apart
with one foot in front of the other for stability, and their
knees and elbows flexed to help absorb the shock.
• Stay alert and focused on the boulderer they are spotting.
• Assume personal responsibility for breaking the person’s fall.
How to Fall
Falling is a natural part of learning to climb. Even expert climb-
ers sometimes lose their grip when they are attempting difficult
moves. Rappellers, too, can slip off balance. Climbers and rap-
pellers who are properly belayed cannot fall more than a few
feet before the belay rope stops them. Because climbers without
a belay must never have their feet more than shoulder-height
above the ground, they, too, should not fall far.
Verbal Signals for Boulderers and Spotters
The verbal signals that spotters exchange with boulderers allow spotters
to be positioned and prepared for whatever situations may arise.
Boulderer Spotters Meaning
“Spotters ready?” “I’m ready to start.”
“Ready.” “I’m ready to protect you.”
“Climbing!” “I’ll start up as soon as spotters
give a go-ahead.”
“Climb on!” “Go ahead.”
“Falling!” “I’m about to fall.”


CLIMBING 81
.Climbing
The Art of Falling
Don’t let the possibility of falling scare you away from climbing and rap-
pelling. With an alert belayer and a top-rope belay, a climber or rappeller
should not fall more than a few inches. By accepting falling as a part of
the sport, you can be ready for it when it does happen. These pointers
will help.
• Stay relaxed. There is no need to panic.
• Maintain body control and face the rock.
• Keep your arms and legs bent and spread apart, catlike, to act as
shock absorbers for cushioning the impact of bumping into the rock.
Hold your head up and try to keep your chest away from the surface.
When you fall while climbing, the belay rope will stop you. If you
bump against the rock, try to cushion the impact with your hands
and feet, keeping your arms flexed rather than rigid. Then you can
continue climbing, or your belayer can lower you to the ground.


Proper rappelling position. Lean out from the rock face, with your feet against
the face and spread slightly, about shoulder width. Look down to see where
you are going.


CLIMBING 83
.Rappelling
Rappelling
Rappelling allows you to make controlled descents down rock
faces that might have taken a long time to climb. Rappelling is
often faster than climbing down. Rappelling should be done
slowly to help prevent any chance of injury and to minimize
damage to the rope. The friction created through the rappel
device generates heat that, in excess, can burn (glaze) the
rope and render it unsafe.
For rappelling, thread the rappel rope through hardware
attached to your harness so that you can use friction to con-
trol the speed of your descent. One of the most popular ways
to rappel is with a tubular belay. Bend the rope through the
device in such a way that you can apply friction to the rope,
then clip the rope to your harness with a locking carabiner
and you will be securely connected to the rappel rope. Tie the
belay rope directly into your harness with a figure-eight fol-
low-through knot. Double-check all knots and the position of
the rappel device.
Be careful to not
cross-load the
carabiner when
getting oriented to
begin the rappel.


84 CLIMBING
Rappelling.
Exchange verbal signals with your belayer, then back up to
the edge of the cliff. Lean back as if you were sitting in a lawn
chair. Keep your feet flat against the wall’s face and your weight
on your heels. Your feet should be about shoulder width apart.
Walk down the wall backward, letting the rope slide slowly
through your hands and the rappel device. Avoid lunging or
lurching movements that might put stress on the anchor
system. To stop, bend the rope behind your body so that no
more rope slips through your brake hand.
A barrel knot
tied near the
lower end of the
rappel rope can
prevent a
rappeller from
sliding off the
rope. Make the
knot big enough
that it cannot
slip through a
rappel device, and
work out
any slack.
Belaying a Rappeller
Belaying rappellers provides an important margin of
safety, especially for those with beginning and interme-
diate skills. Anyone involved in Scouting America rap-
pelling activities must be belayed. For the steps of
belaying a rappeller, see the chapter in this pamphlet
called “Harnesses, Anchors, and Belay Systems.”


CLIMBING 85
.Rappelling
Rappel in a
smooth, steady
manner. Don’t
jump, bounce, or
leap; that can put
extra strain on the
anchors, rope,
and hardware.
If there is a challenging or difficult area, take your time.
Remember to keep your feet shoulder width apart and take
small downward steps. Keep your feet hip height so your feet
push into the rock face. If your feet get too much below you,
they might slip. If that happens, keep calm, hold the rope
tightly and pull it to your hip on your brake-hand side. That
should stop your descent. Now, move your feet to a
comfortable position and continue your descent.


86 CLIMBING
Climbing Ethics.
Climbing Ethics
The ethics of rock climbing require that you do nothing to mark
or damage the rock or to change the experience for other climb-
ers. You may not, for instance, hammer or chip away at rock to
improve a hold. Other climbers would be furious, and with good
reason. Minimize the use of chalk, as it leaves its mark on the
rock. Part of the sport is finding your holds, and chalk not only
scars the face of the rock but also leaves a trail, which reduces
the challenge of finding your route.
Many climbing
areas are in state
and national
parks. Be sure to
obtain any permits
that may be
required to climb
in those areas.


CLIMBING 87
.Climbing Ethics
Leave No Trace Climbing
As a Scout, you know about taking care of the
environment and using no-trace methods in
the outdoors. Most of the following guidelines
will be familiar to you, because most of them
apply to any outdoor activity, including
climbing and rappelling.
• To reach climbing areas, walk on estab-
lished trails, even if it takes a little longer
than following a shortcut.
• Avoid harming grass, trees, and other
vegetation at the climbing area.
• Do not bother nesting birds. Their eggs might not hatch if
the nests are disturbed. Climbers make it a practice to avoid
cliffs during the nesting season. The dates when particular
cliffs are off-limits to climbers are usually published in
climbing guidebooks for the area.
• Never scratch graffiti into rock surfaces or chip the rock to
change natural handholds.
• Chalked-up holds can detract from the pleasure of an ascent
for other climbers. On natural rock, avoid using chalk. If you
must use it, use rock-colored or transparent chalk if possible
and on the fingertips only. Securely close chalk bags so that
chalk won’t spill out.
• Pick up any trash you find, whether it is yours or someone
else’s. Put litter in your pockets or pack, and carry it out with
you for proper disposal.
Before climbing anywhere on private property or public
lands, you must get the landowner’s or land manager’s
permission. Be careful to do no damage. It takes only
one careless or inconsiderate climber to cause an area
to be closed to all climbers.


88 CLIMBING
Climbing Terminology.
Climbing Terminology
abseiling (or rappelling). Descending by a controlled slide down a
rope that is anchored at the top of a route. See rappelling.
aid climbing. Using rope and other gear to give the climber something
to hang from or pull up on; using any means other than hands and feet
to get up a climb. See free climbing.
anchor. Ropes, runners, and other pieces of equipment set up to secure
a climber, rappeller, or belayer to an anchor point.
anchor point. A well-rooted tree, rock protrusion, properly installed
bolt, properly placed pro, or other convenient location for attaching
carabiners, runners, or rope for belay and rappel systems.
ascending. Moving upward.
belay. The protection provided a climber or rappeller tied to a belay
rope. The rope is managed by a belayer in such a way that the fall of a
climber or rappeller will be arrested almost immediately.
belay device. A piece of hardware used for belaying; it simplifies the
process of locking the rope to stop the fall of a climber or rappeller.
The most common belay devices are tube devices.
belayer. The person who manages the rope and is responsible for
stopping the fall of a climber or rappeller.
bight. A bend in a rope. A bight is important for tying certain knots used
for belaying, and for securing ropes into rappel or belay devices.
bolt. An artificial anchor point formed by driving a special bolt into a
hole drilled into a rock face. This should only be done by a skilled climber.
A carabiner may be clipped into the hanger attached to the bolt.
bouldering. Climbing on boulders or other steep faces without going
more than shoulder-height off the ground. Boulderers are protected by
spotters rather than a rope belay.
carabiner. A steel or aluminum ring with a spring-loaded gate.
Carabiners are used to connect pieces of climbing equipment and to
secure rope to webbing, anchor points, and protection devices.
chimney. A crack large enough to accommodate a climber’s body.
chimneying. Ascending by pressing the hands and feet against
opposite sides of a large crack.
Climb On Safely. Scouting America’s guidelines for effectively and
safely managing unit climbing and rappelling activities.
Belay device
Carabiner


CLIMBING 89
.Climbing Terminology
climbing. A challenging sport that always involves the skills of
ascending and belaying or spotting, and may also include
rappelling and bouldering.
cling. A handhold involving one or more fingers bent over a hold.
counterbalance. A combination hold that involves the entire body,
requiring the climber to use position and weight distribution—for
instance, applying pressure with the feet or hands in opposite
directions—to make the most of minimal holds.
descending. Moving downward by rappelling or down-climbing.
down-climbing. Using hands and feet for balance while descending
a moderate or steep face.
dynamic rope. Rope that stretches 6 percent to 10 percent to absorb
the energy of a fall. Normally used for climbing.
edge. The brink of a ledge or a small horizontal hold on a rock face.
edging. Standing on a nub or narrow ledge of rock with the side of the
climbing shoe.
face. A surface suitable for climbing, usually a natural rock formation.
See wall.
figure-eight descending device. This formerly popular device has
been superseded by tubular belay/rappel devices.
foothold. A knob of rock, a crack, an edge, or some other feature of
a climbing surface where a climber can place a foot while ascending
or descending.
free climbing. Using only the hands and feet on natural features of the
rock; rope and hardware are not used directly to help the climber scale
a surface, but only for safety in case the climber falls. See aid climbing.
handhold. A knob of rock, a crack, a ledge, or some other feature
of a climbing surface that a climber can hold onto while ascending
or descending.
hard fall. An instance when a climber or rappeller falls far enough to
place significant stress on the body, rope, webbing, or hardware. A hard
fall will likely result in injury to the climber. Records of hard falls must
be noted in the written histories of the rope and gear involved, and
factored into equipment retirement decisions.
harness. Webbing either tied or commercially sewn to fit around the
hips and legs. Harnesses allow climbers, rappellers, and belayers to
attach themselves to belay systems and rappel ropes.
jamming. Placing a hand or foot into a crack and wedging it so that it
will not slip out.
kernmantle. Strong, synthetic rope composed of a woven outer sheath
surrounding an inner core. Kernmantle rope is the only rope that should
be used for Scouting America climbing, rappelling, or belaying
activities.
Counterbalancing
Harness


90 CLIMBING
Climbing Terminology.
kilonewton. A unit of measurement for determining the impact
force and breaking strength of climbing ropes (1 kilonewton =
224.8 pounds).
lead climbing. When climbers establish points of protection as they
ascend by inserting chocks, nuts, or other hardware into cracks in the
rock, and clipping the belay rope to them with carabiners, usually
using quickdraws intended to keep the rope in line. This type of
climbing may be practiced during council and district activities only
with a top-rope belay.
Leave No Trace. Scouting America’s methods and commitment to car-
ing for the outdoors; the Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the
Outdoor Code extend to climbing areas and the routes leading to them.
lieback (layback). A climbing hold accomplished by pulling against a
crack or an edge with the hands while pressing on rock with the feet
while maintaining three-point contact at all times.
locking carabiner. A carabiner fitted with a mechanism that can be
screwed or set to hold the carabiner gate closed. A double-locking
carabiner is preferred for climbing and rappelling activities.
mantle. A climbing maneuver for hoisting oneself onto a ledge.
mountaineering. Climbing mountains. In addition to rock climbing
ability, mountaineering may require the skills of route finding,
wilderness camping, and ascending snow and ice.
nose-over-toes. A well-balanced position used to make descents on
gentle slopes.
pockets. Holes in rock that may be used as holds.
protection. A piece of equipment used as an anchor point; sometimes
shortened to “pro.”
protection system. The rope, hardware, webbing, and anchors used
together to belay a climber or rappeller.
rappel device. A piece of hardware such as the figure-eight descending
device that helps rappellers control the speed of a rappel.
rappelling. Descending by a controlled slide down a rope that is
anchored at the top of a route.
rest step. A way of settling the weight onto the skeletal system in order
to allow muscles to recover during a climb.
rock gym. An indoor climbing facility.
rope bag. A bag or pack designed for stowing and carrying a
climbing rope.
rope drag. Friction or resistance created when a rope runs over rock or
through pieces of protection.
rope stretch. The amount of “give” in a climbing rope.
runner (sling). A loop of commercially prepared webbing used for
various purposes including setting up anchors, placing protection, and
connecting pieces of climbing equipment.
Mantling


CLIMBING 91
.Climbing Terminology
safety knot. A knot tied in addition to the main knot to keep the
main knot from untying or slipping. Also called a “backup” knot or
“stopper” knot.
sewing machine leg. The shaking phenomenon sometimes experi-
enced by a climber when muscles tire.
slingshot belay. A top-rope belay featuring a belayer on the ground.
The rope runs from the belayer up to an anchor at the top of the climb,
then down to the climber, forming the shape of a slingshot.
smearing. Pressing the sole of a climbing shoe against a surface in
order to climb.
spotter. A person on the ground who provides protection to a
boulderer to help prevent injury to the boulderer in case of a fall.
static rope. Rope with minimal stretch. Static kernmantle rope can be
used for top-rope belays and most commonly for rappelling.
sticht plate. A simple belay device that, like all belay devices, relies
on friction.
tail. The free end of a rope or piece of webbing after a knot has been
tied. A safety knot is often tied in the tail to help protect the
primary knot.
three-point stance. A stable position for a climber. One hand and
both feet are on good holds on the rock, or two hands and one foot,
freeing the other limb to move.
top-roping. Belaying a climber with an anchor at the top of a climb.
The belayer may be anchored at the bottom of a climb (see slingshot
belay), or at the top. All Scouting America climbing activities more than
shoulder-height above the ground must be protected with a belay.
traversing. Moving sideways on a face without gaining or losing
much elevation.
tubular webbing. Nylon straps used to rig anchors, to form seat
harnesses, to make runners, and for other purposes.
tying in. Attaching a rope to a climber’s harness.
undercling. A kind of hold with the palms facing up, usually under a
rock formation.
wall. A vertical climbing surface, often found at climbing gyms and
constructed outdoor climbing facilities. High rock faces are also
known as walls.
Undercling


92 CLIMBING
Climbing Resources.
Climbing Resources
Scouting Literature
Belay On; Scouts BSA Handbook for
Boys; Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls;
Climb on Safely; Learn and Live
Knot Cards
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Instruction and Guidebooks
Allen, Linda B. High Mountain
Challenge: A Guide for Young
Mountaineers. AMC Books, 1989.
Burbach, Matt. Gym Climbing:
Improve Technique, Movement,
and Performance. Mountaineers
Books, 2018.
Donahue, Topher and Craig Luebben.
Rock Climbing: Mastering Basic Skills,
2nd ed. Mountaineers Books, 2014.
Fawcett, Ron, et al. The Climber’s
Handbook: Rock, Ice, Alpine,
Expeditions. Sierra Club, 1987.
Lewis, S. Peter. Climbing: From Gym to
Crag, Building Skills for Real Rock.
Mountaineers Books, 2000.
Linxweiler, Eric, and Mike Maude, eds.
Mountaineering: The Freedom of the
Hills, 9th ed. Mountaineers Books, 2017.
Long, John. How to Rock Climb! Globe
Pequot Press, 2010.
Long, John, and Bob Gaines. Climbing
Anchors. Falcon Guides, 2013.
Loughman, Michael. Learning to Rock
Climb. Random House, 1982.
Luebben, Craig. Knots for Climbers.
Falcon, 2011.
Mellor, Don. Rock Climbing: A Trailside
Guide. W. W. Norton, 2003.
Roper, Steve, and Allen Steck. Fifty
Classic Climbs of North America.
Sierra Club, 1996.
Sherman, John. Better Bouldering,
2nd. ed. Falcon, 2012.
Takeda, Pete. Extreme Sports: Climb!
National Geographic, 2002.
Toula, Tim. Rock ’n’ Road: An Atlas of
North American Rock Climbing
Areas, 2nd ed. Falcon, 2003.
Voeller, Edward A. Sport Climbing.
Capstone Books, 2000.
Wilkerson, James A., ed. Medicine for
Mountaineering and Other
Wilderness Activities, 6th ed.
Mountaineers Books, 2010.


CLIMBING 93
.Climbing Resources
History and Biography
Bonington, Chris. Mountaineer: Thirty
Years of Climbing on the World’s
Great Peaks. Sierra Club, 1996.
Curran, Jim. K2: Triumph and Tragedy.
Houghton Mifflin, 1987.
Fraser, Mary Ann. On Top of the World:
The Conquest of Mount Everest.
Henry Holt, 1991.
Jones, Chris. Climbing in North America.
Mountaineers Books, 1997.
Krakauer, Jon. Into Thin Air: A Personal
Account of the Mount Everest
Disaster. Anchor Books, 1998.
MacDonald, Dougald, ed. The Best of
Rock and Ice: An Anthology.
Mountaineers Books, 1999.
Messner, Reinhold. The Crystal Horizon:
Everest—The First Solo Ascent.
Mountaineers Books, 1989.
Rosen, Mike. The Conquest of Everest.
Bookwright Press, 1990.
Sherman, John. Stone Crusade: A
Historical Guide to Bouldering in
America. American Alpine Club, 1999.
Weihenmayer, Erik. Touch the Top of
the World: A Blind Man’s Journey to
Climb Farther Than the Eye Can See:
My Story. Plume, 2001.
Whittaker, Jim. A Life on the Edge:
Memoirs of Everest and Beyond,
50th anniversary edition.
Mountaineers Books, 2013.
Periodical
Climbing Magazine
5720 Flatiron Parkway
Boulder, CO 80301
Telephone: 303-253-6412
www.climbing.com
Online Resource
Mountain Project
www.mountainproject.com
Acknowledgments
We appreciate staff members of
the All Adventure climbing gym in
Torrington, Connecticut, for allowing
us to use their facilities to shoot many
of the indoor climbing photos seen in
this pamphlet. Thanks also to the
Connecticut Rivers Council’s Camp
Mattatuck in Plymouth, Connecticut.
Many of the outdoor tower photos were
taken there, and we appreciate the use
of the camp facilities.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Berg Adventures, courtesy—page 16
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Agricultural Research Service/Scott
Bauer, courtesy—page 29 (tick)
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are royalty-free
stock images or the property of or
protected by Scouting America.
Jesse Scofield—pages 14, 35
(girl climbing)
Nate Luke Photography—page 19
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 14–15, 30, 39, 41, 43, 45–47,
51–57, 59–60, 62–63, 69, 73–76, 78,
and 88–91


94 CLIMBING
Notes.





UP YOUR
MERIT
BADGE
GAME
Sign up today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special Scout rate.
Get ahead in Scouting with
Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.