COIN
COLLECTING


COIN
COLLECTING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35874
ISBN 978-0-8395-3390-0
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Coin-Collecting or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
FPO


COIN COLLECTING 3





COIN COLLECTING 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Coin Collecting Has Its Own Language . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
How Coins Are Made . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Coins Through the Ages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Coins in the United States . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Paper Money . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Tokens, Medals, and Decorations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Building Your Own Collection; Proper Storage Techniques . . 53
Great Coin Collections on Display . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Coin Collecting Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62





COIN COLLECTING 7
.Introduction
Introduction
Coin collecting is one of the oldest of all hobbies. From earliest
times, people valued coins not only as a means of trading and
storing wealth, but also as miniature works of art. As early as
the 15th century, coin collectors began keeping coins for
historical significance and not just for their monetary value.
When you hold an old coin in your hand, you make a
connection with people, places, and events of another time.
Imagine who first used that coin, how many times it changed
hands, and where the coin traveled. Owning a coin is like
owning a piece of history.
Coins are universal and timeless. Every piece is worthy
of being saved. People recognize coinage—no matter how
odd or foreign. By preserving the past, collectors create a
legacy for the future.
You do not have to spend a lot of money to enjoy
collecting coins. Thousands of coins are available for less
than $1 each. Some pieces from the Roman Empire may be
acquired for as little as $5. On the other hand, collecting
can become an extreme challenge, with collectors bidding
against one another at auctions in attempts to own rare or
exotic pieces.
Coin collectors enjoy the thrill of
acquiring prized pieces, assembling a fine
collection, and even selling some of their
coins for a profit. But true collectors
also value learning about the various
forms of currency as well as sharing a
common interest with other collectors.
It is no wonder that more than 3 million
Americans participate in coin collecting
in one form or another.
Coin collecting, so long the hobby of
kings, is truly the king of hobbies.
Numismatics—
nu–miz–mat´–iks—
The study or
collection of coins,
medals, tokens,
and paper money.
Morgan silver dollar, struck
from 1878 to 1904 and in 1921


8 COIN COLLECTING
Coin Collecting Has Its Own Language.
Coin Collecting Has Its
Own Language
You will encounter the following terms as you learn about the
hobby of coin collecting.
alloy. A combination of two or more metals.
back. The backside of a piece of paper money, opposite the face.
bank note. A piece of paper money issued by a banking institution.
cast. A manufacturing method where molten metal is poured into
a mold which holds a design.
circulation. Passage of coins, notes, and bills currently in use as
money from person to person.
commemorative. A special coin issued to mark an event or honor
a person or place.
currency. All coins and paper money in circulation.
date set. A collection of coins of a single type and denomination
that includes every year during a specific date span; for example, a
Lincoln cent from every year from 1959 to 2008 is a date set.
decoration. An award presented to an individual by a government
authority for service to a country; the decoration is meant to be worn.
denomination. The face value of a coin or bank note.
designer’s initials. The initials of the artist who created the
design, often a two or three very small letters found in the lower
portion of the design.
die. A metal block engraved with a design in reverse for use in
striking coins.
die crack. An irregular raised line on the surface of a struck coin,
caused by the coin metal pushing through a crack in the die.
edge. The vertical side of a coin, often called the third side. It often
is either smooth, lettered or holding a securing design called reeding.
error. A coin or bank note on which a mistake was made
during the production process.
face. The front side of a bank note, often including the name of the
issuing authority and denomination.
field. The smooth area of a coin’s surface where there is no design
or legend.
face
denomination
bank note


COIN COLLECTING 9
.Coin Collecting Has Its Own Language.
grading. The process of assigning rating terms which collectors use
to describe the level of wear on a coin.
inscription. The words or letters that run across the field of a coin
or medal, often horizontally.
legal tender. Coins or bank notes issued by a government to be
accepted as a valid form of payment.
legend. The words or letters that circle the inside border of a coin
or medal.
medal. Often a round metal object struck as an award or
commemoration. It is not legal tender and is meant to be displayed,
not worn.
mintage. The number of coins actually struck during one
minting period.
mint mark. A symbol or letter used to indicate which mint
struck the coin.
mule. A coin, token, or medal struck from two dies not meant to
be paired together.
obverse. The front (or “heads”) side of a coin; often it bears
important legends, portraits or design elements.
paper money. The general term given to bank notes, scrip, and
other paper items used as currency.
planchet. The blank metal disk on which a coin design is struck.
reeding. The grooved vertical lines around the edge of a coin, used
as a security measure.
relief. The part of a coin’s design that is raised above the surface.
reverse. The back (or “tails”) side of a coin; usually bears
the design of lesser importance.
series. A set of coins or paper currency of a particular design
including one example of each year, from each mint; for example,
Jefferson nickels, 1938 to the present. For paper money, series
refers to the year printed on the face, representing the year the
design was first placed in use.
slab. A coin that has been encapsulated in a plastic holder by a
professional grading or authentication service.
strike. The process of stamping a coin, token, or medal with a
design; involves pressing obverse and reverse dies together on a
planchet with great force.
token. A coinlike object issued by a company or private firm for
use in transactions; it is not legal tender.
type. A general term for a coin’s distinguishing design, such as the
Roosevelt dime.
type set. A set of coins or paper currency of a particular
denomination that includes all of the different designs and that can
be expanded to include other denominations and designs, such as a
20th century type set.
watermark. An impression left in paper during the manufacturing
process that is visible when the paper is held up to the light; used
to deter counterfeiting.
In this pamphlet,
the first mention
of these terms is
shown in italics.
reverse
reeding


A steam-powered coining press, used at the Paris Mint in the 1860s


COIN COLLECTING 11
.How Coins Are Made
How Coins Are Made
Whether you are collecting ancient gold coins or the 50 State
Quarters®, you will be a more knowledgeable collector if you
have a general understanding of how coins are made.
In ancient times people cast some early
coins by pouring molten metal into molds
that were engraved with designs, other coin
makers would place a measured lump of
metal on the die and then strike it with a
hammer to force the metal into the design.
Later, the Romans used hinged dies, which
allowed a planchet to receive properly aligned
designs on both sides.
Early Machine-Struck Coins
As trade developed throughout Europe,
the need to accelerate the minting process
and to standardize the appearance of
coinage led to machine-struck coins. The
strong and even pressure of the screw
(or mill) press, invented in the mid-1500s,
created coins with uniform
shapes and sharper images.
The screw press required several people to operate.
It produced uniform coins, but at a slow pace.
The U.S. Mint
produced approxi-
mately 13.6 billion
coins in 2022
for general
circulation.
Surely some of
them have found
their way into
your pockets.
A screw press, used
at the Paris Mint in
the 1780s


12 COIN COLLECTING
How Coins Are Made.
On the roller press, invented in the 16th century, a strip
of metal passed between two cylinders that had multiple
designs engraved on them. The cylinders impressed obverse
and reverse designs on the sheet, which was then cut into
many individual coins.
Counterfeiting became such a serious problem during the
Renaissance period (14th through 16th centuries) that people
caught doing it often were executed. Some criminals trimmed
the edges of gold and silver coins to steal the metal. To prevent
these activities, coiners fitted a collar, or retaining ring, around
each planchet and then struck the blank. This formed a
perfectly round, smooth-edged coin. Eventually, the collar was
treated like a third die, with a legend or design engraved on
the inside surface. The edge marks often were grooved vertical
lines called reeding, like those on today’s dimes, quarters, and
half dollars.
Mass-Produced Coins
In the 1790s in Birmingham, England, Matthew Boulton and
James Watt developed the steam-powered coin press. Unlike
the screw press, which required several operators
and was slow, the steam press struck the
planchet with a solid stroke. This pro-
duced coins of uniform size and design
with great speed and accuracy—and the
press required only one operator.
The reducing machine was another
invention that increased the produc-
tion of coins. It made an actual-size
tracing of a coin design from a
large-scale model of the design.
From this tracing, or hub,
the master die and working
dies were made. Early dies
were cut by hand; the hub
allowed many identical dies
to be made.
Some modern
presses can strike
more than 800
coins per minute.
Today’s dies last a long time because they are made of
specially hardened steel.
Master hubs for the
Michigan State Quarter®


COIN COLLECTING 13
.How Coins Are Made
How Coins Are Made Today
The U.S. Mint buys or produces coils of the necessary metal for
coin production. These coils are of the proper thickness for the
particular coin to be produced. The long strips of metal are fed
under a punching machine that cuts out several rows of round
blanks, much like a cookie cutter works. The webbing, or
remaining strip (now full of holes), is shredded and recycled.
The blanks then go through a large rotating furnace that
heats and softens them prior to striking. The blanks are washed
and dried to remove any surface contaminants. Next, the blanks
go through an “upsetting mill,” which squeezes them slightly
around the edge to form a raised rim on each side. This raised
rim allows the finished coins to be stacked and also helps
reduce surface wear once the coins are placed into circulation.
After this process has been completed, the blank is called a
planchet. The U.S. Mint also purchases planchets from an
outside manufacturer.
Once the planchets are produced, and again
after the planchets are made into coins,
they pass through a “riddler” machine,
which sorts out any irregular pieces.
Each coil is about 12 inches wide and weighs
around 6,000 pounds.
Planchet
COIL


14 COIN COLLECTING
How Coins Are Made.
Lastly, the planchets are fed into a coining press where
the obverse and reverse dies strike the planchets, thus creating
coins. There are actually three dies involved in the production
of a coin: the obverse die, the reverse die, and the collar. The
collar is a ring of metal that surrounds the planchets during
striking. It keeps the planchet from spreading out when struck
and also imparts the reeding on the edges of coins as required.
Blanks travel through a washing
machine that removes impurities that
are left after they have been heated.
The upsetting mill forms a rim on each
blank coin.
Batches of identical dies can strike
many coins at one time.
Finished coins—in this case, cents— travel
to be counted and bagged.


COIN COLLECTING 15
.How Coins Are Made
The finished coins are then spot-inspected, counted,
and/or weighed, and placed into large bags for shipment
to the various Federal Reserve facilities. From there, they
are distributed to local banks upon demand.
Clad Coinage
In the 1960s, many countries
stopped using silver in their
circulating coins because the metal
content was worth more than the face
value of the coin being made. (There
was more than 25 cents’ worth of silver
in a quarter!) Rather than creating coins with new
designs to replace silver issues such as the dime and
quarter, in 1965 the U.S. Mint continued the standard
designs on coins made of three layers of metal. Typical
clad coins have a copper core surrounded by layers of
copper-nickel alloy that make the coins look silver.
Coin bags are filled, weighed, sealed shut, and then taken to
storage vaults where they remain in inventory until needed
in circulation.
Reverse of the
California State
Quarter®


16 COIN COLLECTING
How Coins Are Made.
Special Coins
Certain coins are never meant for circulation. Some are
specially minted for sale to collectors; others are prepared
to test designs during the production process. These special
coins are produced in small quantities.
essai. The essai coin is a new
changed, or proposed coin design,
often with “ESSAI” stamped in
the field.
pattern. A pattern is a
proposed coin of new design,
denomination, or metal, that
is not adopted during the year
it is struck.
proof. A proof coin is the highest
quality coin, as the utmost care is taken
during the minting process to produce a flawless coin. The mint
polishes the dies and metal blanks before
striking. Sometimes the dies are sandblasted to create “frosted”
features that contrast with the polished surfaces of the field.
Proof coins can be distinguished by their sharp detail, brilliant
mirrorlike surface, and sharp rims. The term “proof” describes
the way the coin was made and should not be confused
with a grade.
specimen. A specimen is a coin of regular design and metal
that is often made for presentation. It is usually struck at
greater than normal pressure with specially prepared dies
and planchets.
trial strike. A trial strike is a test piece, often
of an incomplete design, made
during die preparation. It usually
is struck with a single die.
Because the trial strike is
never meant to leave the
mint, it is a rare find.
The image of Thomas Jefferson on the 2006 Return to
Monticello nickel, a proof coin, was based on a paint-
ing of him by artist Rembrandt Peale (1778–1860).
Proof, frosted
design
Trial strike
Essai


COIN COLLECTING 17
.How Coins Are Made
Mint Errors and Counterfeits
Some coins and paper money are altered by mistake; some are
altered by intention.
Errors
In coin production, mistakes are called mint errors. And they
are collectible. Although most coins and currency are carefully
inspected before they are shipped out to Federal Reserve banks,
some errors slip into circulation. Errors fall into three groups.
Planchet errors occur as the coin is
struck. The coin blanks can be damaged,
clipped, or broken. A common error is the
clipped planchet. This happens when the
planchet strip from which the blanks are
being struck fails to advance far enough
ahead after being punched, and then the
punches strike down again over a
previously punched area.
Striking errors occur
during the minting of the
coin. Off-centered strikes
and double or triple
strikes are examples.
Die errors cause small
differences among coins
of the same type. These are
called die varieties. Dies chip, break,
crack, rotate, and will cause the same
change to each coin until replaced. For
example, a die crack creates a raised line
on the struck coin.
A common error
happens when
a planchet is
improperly
centered.
The collar can’t
completely
surround the
blank, so the
coin is struck
off-center.
Radial flow lines
on a coin are
created when the
planchet is struck.
The extent to
which the lines
reflect light is a
coin’s luster.
Collectors love the mule, a blank struck with two dies
not meant to be used together. This results in an odd
coin, such as a quarter obverse with a dollar reverse,
which makes a $1.25 coin!
Incomplete planchet
Double die
Triple struck


18 COIN COLLECTING
How Coins Are Made.
Even mint errors must be in perfect condition to get the
best price. And beware of counterfeit errors—coins that have
been intentionally altered after leaving the U.S. Mint.
Altered Coins
Some coins are altered to resemble other, more valuable coins.
The alterations are deliberate changes made by someone out-
side of the mint who wants to profit by making the coins
appear rare and desirable.
Common alterations include changing mint marks and
dates. For example, the 1914D cent is more valuable than the
1914 cent with no mint mark, so tricky fakers add a D to a
1914 plain cent and try to pass it off as a 1914D.
Collectors consider altered coins to be damaged and,
therefore, nearly worthless. If you study a coin series and know
what genuine coins look like, you will recognize an altered coin
when you see one.
Common paper money errors include off-center
notes, white creases where the note was folded, ink
smears, and cutting errors. An inverted error occurs
when a sheet is fed upside down in the final printing
stage, making signatures and serial numbers appear
upside down.
The most desirable paper money error is a note
with the face of one denomination matched with the
back design of another denomination, creating a dual
denomination note, such as the face of a $5 bill with
the back of a $10 bill.
A buffed coin has been polished to make it look shiny,
like an uncirculated or proof coin. Use a magnifying
glass to check the amount of wear on the high points
of the design. True luster caused from the pressure of
striking a coin cannot be duplicated or restored by
polishing. Severe polishing with a wire brush or wheel
also can alter the surface of a coin.


COIN COLLECTING 19
.How Coins Are Made
Counterfeits
Counterfeit, or false, money has been around as long as official
currency. Two major types of counterfeits are substitute money,
which is made to be used in commerce and fool merchants,
and forgeries, which are made to fool collectors.
Counterfeit coins can be cast or die-struck. Cast counter-
feits are more common because it is easier and cheaper to make
a casting mold from a real coin than it is to engrave a look-alike
die. Counterfeits are often used to make copies of silver coins in
circulation. As long as the coins were not dropped on a counter,
they could pass for silver coins. Struck silver coins make a dis-
tinctive ring when dropped; cast lead does not.
Forgers look for big profits from unwary collectors. They
cast bullion coins or invest in expensive equipment to make
die-struck counterfeits of rare coins.
Many older reproductions, or copies, were made for
collectors so they could show a sample of a scarce design
in their collections. These copies often were cast in two-part
molds and have a telltale seam on the edge where the two
mold halves joined. To distinguish reproductions from counter-
feits, the Hobby Protection Act of 1973 requires reproductions
to be marked with the word COPY.
Clad coinage has replaced precious metal coins for
circulation, and many counterfeiters believe that late
20th-century coins are not worth copying. Because
high-value coins no longer circulate, counterfeiters
often focus on paper money.
Know what the real coin should look like. How can you
tell if a coin is a counterfeit or forgery? Look at illustra-
tions in books. A cast counterfeit might be smaller than
the real coin, or feel greasy to the touch. The reeding or
lettering on the edge might be imperfect. The field
might show pitting or bubbles. If you suspect a coin is
counterfeit, have an authentication service look at it.





COIN COLLECTING 21
.Coins Through the Ages
Coins Through the Ages
Before people used coins in
exchange for goods, they traded
with hand-fashioned gold and
silver pieces called ingots. These
varied in size and shape as well
as in value. At every transaction,
the merchant or trader had to
weigh each ingot and verify that
the metal was genuine. Later,
ingots were stamped with a
seal that verified the weight,
contents, and purity of the
metal. People realized that it
was much easier to do business
with stamped ingots.
Ancient Coins
Coins were made in the Mediterranean, Central Asia, and
Far East regions between 650 and 600 B.C. The most famous of
these first coins are from the Greek kingdom of Lydia (located
in modern-day western Turkey). They are made of electrum
(a natural alloy of gold and silver) and carry a stamped lion’s
head on the obverse and crude markings on the reverse.
Coins made of electrum did not always
contain equal portions of gold and silver,
so the value among coins differed even if
the weights were equal. Eventually, metal
refining improved, and the Greeks started
making nearly pure gold or silver coins
in denominations, such as the stater
and tetradrachm.
In Greek and
Roman times,
coins were a way
to spread news,
propaganda, and
ideas because
they were
circulated widely
to all classes of
people for long
periods of time.
A modern gold ingot
Lydian stater featuring the
foreparts of a lion and a bull, circa 600 B.C.


22 COIN COLLECTING
Coins Through the Ages.
With the decline of Greek power, coins of the Roman
Empire (30 B.C. to A.D. 425) gradually replaced Greek coins in
the Mediterranean region. Roman coins often have a portrait of
the emperor or his family members on the obverse. The design
on the reverse often features a temple, shrine, or monument of
which the local inhabitants were particularly proud. The coins,
in denominations such as the gold aureus, silver denarius, and
bronze sestertius, are important because they are the only visu-
al records left of buildings long gone.
The Chinese developed cast copper coins with distinctive
square holes in the center. The coins, called “cash,” could be
strung together and carried around. Except for changes in the
legends to identify the ruler, denomination, and mint, early
designs were unchanged until replaced by machine-struck coins
in the 1870s.
Medieval Coins
When the Western Roman Empire fell into chaos in the fifth
century, the Byzantines shut down many of the Roman mints
and opened their own. As centuries passed, the quality of the
artistry and engraving on the Byzantine coins deteriorated.
During the fifth and sixth centuries, the Islamic world
expanded. The Arab conquerors had very little coinage of
their own, so they issued coins that imitated Byzantine coins.
However, the new coins featured only inscriptions, such as
the names of rulers or quotations from the Koran, the sacred
scriptures of Islam.
People on
the Indian
subcontinent also
created marked
metal coins. The
thick Indian coins
often included
only inscriptions.


COIN COLLECTING 23
.Coins Through the Ages
Medieval coins of Europe were very thin with legends
written in Latin, a cross on the reverse, and portraits rendered
in very basic form—quite a change from the realistic depictions
on Greek and Roman coins.
As trade expanded, countries made coins that featured
national themes. In the early 1500s, realistic depictions of rulers
reappeared on coin designs. Currencies from France, England,
and Italy became widely known along trade routes, and were
accepted and imitated in many different areas of the world.
During the Golden Age in the fourth and third centuries
B.C., the Greeks created some of the most beautiful
coins ever minted. The coins, stamped on thick planchets
with high-relief designs, feature portraits of Greek gods
and goddesses or political emblems on the obverse, and
mythical animals or individual civic badges on the
reverse. Mint marks identify which cities minted the coins.
Tetradrachm, with Alexander the Great
on the obverse and Zeus on the reverse
Tetradrachm, with Athena on the
obverse and owl on the reverse
In ancient Greece, the smallest silver coins used for
small change were no wider than a pencil eraser.
Because the ancient Greeks did not have pockets or
purses, they carried the coins in their mouths. However,
they did not do that with bronze coins, which tasted
awful and might have poisoned them!
The discovery of
silver deposits in
Joachimsthal in
Bohemia led to
the production
of large silver
coins nicknamed
Joachimsthalers.
The name was
shortened to thaler
or taler, eventually
becoming
the dollar.
Byzantine minters followed Roman coin-making
traditions but introduced new features, such as
Christian symbols. They later replaced Latin
inscriptions with Greek letters.


Modern U.S. commemoratives


COIN COLLECTING 25
.Coins in the United States
Coins in the United States
Early settlers traded with American Indians and other colonists,
using wampum (strands of beads), animal skins, tobacco, tea,
musket balls, and salt as money. As more immigrants and
traders arrived in America, the demand for coins increased.
Foreign coins of all kinds were accepted, particularly the
Spanish “piece of eight,” which became the standard money
unit throughout the Colonial period.
Two Bits, Four Bits,
Six Bits, a Dollar!
The Spanish milled dollar, or piece of
eight, was often cut into pieces to make
change. Each piece, or bit, was worth
121⁄2 cents, which is why people often
call the quarter “two bits.”


26 COIN COLLECTING
Coins in the United States.
Colonial-Era Coins
England would not provide small change currency to the
Colonies, so certain Colonies and individuals took matters into
their own hands. In the Massachusetts Bay Colony, John Hull
minted the NE (New England) shilling. The coin was easy to
counterfeit, so it was replaced with a series of tree coins: the
Willow, Oak, and Pine. These tree coins were minted for 30
years, from 1652 to 1682, but almost all bear the date of 1652.
This was done so King Charles II of England could not prove
the coins had been minted continuously without his approval.
Once the Declaration of Independence
was signed in 1776, a national coinage was proposed. The
Continental dollar was the first pattern coin struck for the
United States of America. The obverse carries the Latin leg-
end FUGIO (I Flee) and the inscription “Mind Your Business.”
People interpret the message as “Time flies, so mind your
business.” The reverse design, suggested
by Benjamin Franklin, shows 13
linked circles, each with a
Colony’s name, and
the center inscription
“We Are One.”
In Maryland, Cecil Calvert (Lord Baltimore) arranged
for coins to be minted in England for use in the
Colony. Because the English king, Charles I, had
recently been beheaded, Calvert was not afraid to
put his own portrait on the obverse.
NE (New England)
shilling, far left, and
Pine Tree shilling,
obverse sides, 1652
Obverse, Lord
Baltimore six-
pence, 1659
Continental dollar,
1776


COIN COLLECTING 27
.Coins in the United States
State Coins
The Articles of Confederation (1781) established a central
government but allowed the states to act very independently.
While statesmen tried to develop a national coinage, certain
states minted their own coins. New Hampshire, New Jersey,
and Connecticut contracted with individual silversmiths to
make coins; Massachusetts created its own mint. Although not
a state at the time, Vermont also produced its own coinage.
Massachusetts cent, 1787,
obverse and reverse
Vermont cent, 1785,
obverse and reverse
Connecticut cent, 1787,
obverse and reverse
New Jersey cent, 1786,
obverse and reverse


28 COIN COLLECTING
Coins in the United States.
National Coins
Once the Constitution was ratified and a strong central govern-
ment was in place, Congress established a national coinage.
In 1792, it passed a bill creating the United States Mint in the
nation’s capital, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. The bill called for
coins to be minted in gold, silver, and copper in 10 denomina-
tions as needed.
Coins of the New Nation
Denomination Value Year First Struck
Gold Eagle $ 10.00 1795
Gold Half Eagle $ 5.00 1795
Gold Quarter Eagle $ 2.50 1796
Silver Dollar $ 1.00 1794
Silver Half Dollar $ .50 1794
Silver Quarter Dollar $ .25 1796
Silver Disme (dime) $ .10 1796
Silver Half Disme $ .05 1794
Copper Cent $ .01 1793
Copper Half Cent $ .005 1793
The first U.S. coins bear a female
representation of Liberty. However,
George Washington was so popular
that many people wanted his
portrait on the new U.S. coins.
After all, other countries had for
centuries put images of their rulers
on coins. But an American president
served for four years at a time, not for
life like monarchs and emperors. It would be confusing
to change coin designs after each election.


COIN COLLECTING 29
.Coins in the United States
Expansion of the U.S. Mint
From 1793 to 1838, the mint in Philadelphia was the only mint
in operation in the United States. But when gold was discovered
in various areas of the country, the U.S. Mint opened branches
in Charlotte, North Carolina; Dahlonega, Georgia; and New
Orleans, Louisiana. Later, when gold was found in California,
a branch mint was opened in San Francisco in 1854.
Philadelphia mint, 1793
Why Are Mint
Marks Important?
Collectors use mint marks as one
way to help determine a coin’s
value. One mint might strike a
large quantity of a particular coin;
another might strike a small quantity.
The coin produced in smaller quantities
usually is scarcer and therefore sometimes
more valuable to a collector.
2006 Jefferson nickel, struck at the Philadelphia Mint


30 COIN COLLECTING
The U.S. Mint opened another branch in Carson City,
Nevada, after silver deposits were discovered in the Comstock
Lode. With plenty of silver available, the U.S. Mint introduced
a new silver dollar design featuring a Liberty Head on the
obverse and an eagle within a wreath on the reverse. Collectors
commonly call this the Morgan dollar, based on the name of
the designer, George T. Morgan. (See photo on page 7.)
To distinguish the branch mint coins from the Philadelphia
Mint coins, the branch mint dies carried a mint mark—letters in
the field to identify which branch made what coins.
The Art of the Coin
President Theodore Roosevelt was a supporter of better coin
designs. He loved the classical coins of ancient Greece and
commissioned well-known sculptor Augustus Saint-Gaudens to
design new $10 and $20 gold coins. The first 1907 gold coins
had extremely high relief, which pleased Roosevelt but
dismayed bankers, who complained that the coins would not
stack. The relief was lowered and coins were struck in great
quantity and were in circulation for 25 years.
Mints and Their Marks
Mint Mark Mint Years of Operation
C Charlotte Mint, North Carolina 1838 to 1861
CC Carson City Mint, Nevada 1870 to 1893
D Dahlonega Mint, Georgia 1838 to 1861
D Denver Mint, Colorado 1906 to present
O New Orleans Mint, Louisiana 1838 to 1909
P Philadelphia Mint, Pennsylvania 1793 to present
S San Francisco Mint, California 1854 to present
W West Point Mint, New York 1984 to present
At the official U.S. Mint website, www.usmint.gov, you can find many
historical facts and images. The “kids” tab leads to some fun areas,
especially the “life of a coin.” In-person public tours are available at the
Philadelphia and Denver mints. Neither the San Francisco mint, which
strikes commemorative coins and proof sets, nor the West Point facility,
where gold and platinum bullion coins are minted, is open to the public.
Coins in the United States.


COIN COLLECTING 31
.Coins in the United States
Roosevelt’s influence affected copper and silver coin
designs, too. In 1909, a portrait of Abraham Lincoln replaced
the American Indian portrait on the cent. The Indian Head cent
had circulated for 50 years. Later, an American Indian portrait
with an American bison (buffalo) on the reverse replaced the
Liberty Head nickel. In 1916, the U.S. Mint introduced the
Winged Liberty (Mercury) dime, Standing Liberty quarter, and
Walking Liberty half dollar. The Morgan dollar was replaced by
the Peace dollar design in 1921.
The 1907 high-relief $20 gold pieces are considered by
many to be not only the most beautiful U.S. coins, but
also great rarities.
In the early 1900s, prominent sculptors of the day
designed the coins. They usually received credit by
having their initials on the coins bearing their designs.
1907 High Relief Double Eagle by
Augustus Saint-Gaudens
Lincoln/Wheat Ears cent, reverse
designed by Victor D. Brenner (VDB),
produced from 1909 to 1958
American Indian Head/Buffalo nickel,
designed by James E. Fraser (F),
produced from 1913 to 1938
Winged Liberty (Mercury) dime,
designed by Adolph A. Weinman
(AW), produced from 1916 to 1945


32 COIN COLLECTING
Coins in the United States.
Parts of a coin, as shown on the 1924 Peace dollar
Some designs come from national competitions.
Anthony de Francisci (AF) won the design competition
for the 1921 Peace dollar, and Felix Schlag (FS) won for
the 1938 Jefferson nickel. Participation in those compe-
titions was by invitation. The U.S. Mint sponsored an
open competition for the bicentennial of the Declaration
of Independence in 1976. Many thousands of everyday
people—from children to professional engravers—
submitted designs for the reverses of the quarter,
half dollar, and dollar.
Standing Liberty quarter, designed by
Hermon A. MacNeil (M), produced from
1916 to 1930
Walking Liberty half dollar, designed
by Adolph A. Weinman (AAW),
produced from 1916 to 1947
LEGEND
RIM DENOMINATIONMINT MARK
Obverse
DESIGNER’S
INITIALS
FIELD
DATE
DESIGN
INSCRIPTION
Starting in 1932, for the bicentennial of George
Washington’s birth, his portrait was placed on the quarter.
Though it was intended to be a one-year commemorative issue,
the Washington quarter was so popular it returned in 1934 to
annual production.
Reverse


COIN COLLECTING 33
.Coins in the United States
In 1946, the U.S. Mint honored Franklin Delano
Roosevelt, president through the Great Depression
and World War II, by putting his portrait on the dime.
Two years later, Benjamin Franklin appeared on the
half dollar, with the Liberty Bell on the reverse. After
President John F. Kennedy was assassinated in 1963,
the U.S. Mint replaced the Franklin half dollar with the
Kennedy design in 1964. The obverse was designed by
Gilroy Roberts and the reverse by Frank Gasparro.
The Dollar Coin Doldrums
The Peace dollar was discontinued in 1935, and no
silver dollars were minted until the Eisenhower
dollar in 1971. It circulated for eight years before it
was replaced in 1979 by the smaller Susan B.
Anthony dollar, honoring the suffrage-movement heroine.
But the Susan B. Anthony dollar was poorly conceived.
People confused it with the quarter because it was close in
size, had the same color, and had a similar reeded edge.
The public saw little need to use the small dollar coin
because the paper dollar was still being made.
In 2000, the U.S. Mint introduced the
Sacagawea dollar, sometimes called the golden
dollar, although it contains no gold. For the new
coin, Congress (which legislates coinage design)
and the U.S. Mint changed the design from the
Susan B. Anthony dollar. The coin is a distinctive
color and has a smooth edge. Since then, the
Presidential dollar series, the Native American series, and
the American Innovation series have been introduced.
However, these coins are not widely used.
Bicentennial Coins of 1976Bicentennial Coins of 1976
For the U.S. bicentennial of 1976 the reverse designs of
the quarter, half dollar and dollar were changed, and in
1975 and 1976, the dates 1776-1976 appeared on the
obverse (there is no quarter, half dollar or dollar coin
dated 1975). The design on the quarter is a colonial
drummer; on the half dollar Independence Hall, and
on the dollar the Liberty Bell and the moon.
Bicentennial coins
Sacagawea dollar


34 COIN COLLECTING
Coins in the United States.
United States Commemorative Coins
The 1892–93 Chicago world’s fair celebrated the 400th
anniversary of Christopher Columbus’s exploration of the New
World. The organizers of the World’s Columbian Exposition
won approval from Congress to commemorate the event with
specially designed quarter- and half dollar coins. Today,
collectors know these as the Isabella quarter and the
Columbian Exposition half dollar.
In 1900, the U.S. Mint featured George Washington and
the Marquis de Lafayette on a commemorative silver dollar.
Later, commemoratives issued in various denominations, such
as the gold $1, $2.50, and $50 coins, honored Lewis and Clark,
President William McKinley, President Thomas Jefferson,
and the Panama-Pacific Exposition of 1915. Most of the
commemoratives from 1915 through 1954 were silver half
dollars. Some of the subjects honored include the Battle of
Gettysburg, Georgia’s Stone Mountain Memorial, and such
people as George Washington Carver, who was born a slave and
became one of this country’s most celebrated
agriculturalists and educators.
After the World’s
Columbian
Exposition, the
idea of issuing
commemorative
coins took hold,
as much to raise
money for special
organizations or
causes as to
celebrate an
American person,
event, or
institution.
The Isabella quarter was issued in 1893 to commemorate
the Columbian Exposition. Queen Isabella of Spain is on the
obverse, left.
1928 Oregon Trail Memorial silver half dollar


COIN COLLECTING 35
.Coins in the United States
The bicentennial of the Declaration of
Independence prompted changes to the
reverse of the circulating quarter, half dollar,
and dollar for the years 1975 and 1976. The
new design was popular, and commemorative
coinage in the United States resumed in 1982
with the commemorative half dollar in honor
of the 250th anniversary of George Washington’s
birth. Recent commemorative coins have honored
Mount Rushmore, the Library of Congress, the 1984
and 2002 Olympic Games, the Centennial of the Statue
of Liberty, and the Bicentennial of the Constitution.
All commemorative coins are legal tender
coins but are not meant for circulation. The
U.S. Mint produces these coins in limited
quantities for a limited period of time.
Bullion Coinage
Bullion is pure or nearly pure precious metal, usually in the
form of ingots or coins. Although it often refers to gold, bullion
also includes silver, platinum, and palladium.
After the 1929 stock market crash, people who hoarded
gold coins removed so much gold from circulation that it
seriously affected the stability of the U.S. economy. The Gold
Hoarding Act of 1933 made it illegal for citizens to hold gold
bullion coins or gold bullion bars. Only numismatic gold coins
were permissible to own.
A bullion coin is
valued by its
weight in a
specific precious
metal, not by
its collectible
or commemora-
tive value.
1937 Battle of Antietam 75th
anniversary (1862–1937) silver half
dollar. Civil War opposing generals
George McClellan and Robert E. Lee
are pictured on the obverse.
From 1954 to 1982, the government
halted production of commemorative
coins because the process was being
overused and abused. Certain groups
tried to increase profits by convincing
Congress to allow coin production at
all the mints, which created three
different coins to sell to collectors.
Or they convinced Congress
to keep mintages low, which
created rarities.


36 COIN COLLECTING
Coins in the United States.
Gradually, the government lifted restrictions and legalized
gold ownership in the 1970s. Gold bullion medallions were
coined in 1974 and 1975 to honor people in the fine arts,
but they were medallions that did not have denominations.
These medallions, in the half-ounce and 1-ounce weights,
were difficult to order and not very well-marketed. Since
1986, the government has struck bullion coins in gold, silver,
and platinum in various denominations and sizes.
The 50 State Quarters® Program
In 1999, the U.S. Mint released the first five quarters in the
50 State Quarters® program. This series honors each of the
50 states. The program ran from 1999 through 2008, with five
new quarters released every year for 10 years. The coins share
the same obverse depicting George Washington, but have
different designs on the reverse.
Each state was responsible for the design of its quarter.
State governors called for design ideas, often through statewide
competitions. Then each governor submitted five designs to
the Mint for renderings. The Commission of Fine Arts and the
Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee made recommendations
to the Secretary of the Treasury, who made the final selection.
Investors purchase
coins made of
precious metal for
two reasons: with
hopes that the
metallic value
(intrinsic world
value) of the coin
increases due to a
rise in the price of
the metal from
which the coin
is made, or with
hopes that the
collectible value
(numismatic world
value) of the coin
increases due to
collector demand.
In honor of the Boy Scouts of America’s 100th
anniversary in 2010, the United States Mint issued
the 2010 Boy Scouts of America Centennial silver
dollar. This commemorative coin features a Boy
Scout, Cub Scout, and Venturer on the obverse with
the quote “Continuing the Journey.” The reverse
features the BSA’s universal fleur-de-lis emblem.
Approximately 350,000 proof and uncirculated coins
were minted.


COIN COLLECTING 37
.Coins in the United States
The 50 State Quarters® were
issued from 1999 through 2008 in
the order of each state’s admis-
sion into the Union. Intended to
inspire a new generation of coin
collectors, the series became the most
successful numismatic program in his-
tory with about half of the U.S. popula-
tion collecting the coins as a casual or
serious pursuit. Congress extended the
program in 2009 to include the District of
Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, American
Samoa, U.S. Virgin Islands, and Northern
Marina Islands.
The U.S. Mint issued 56 America the Beautiful
Quarters® from 2010 to 2021. The obverse of all
the coins depicts George Washington in a version
of the portrait that was not selected for the 1932
quarter competition. The reverse designs depict
national sites like the ones shown here:
Bombay Hook National Wildlife Refuge
(Delaware), Harpers Ferry National
Historical Park (West Virginia), Kisatchie
National Forest (Louisiana), and
Theodore Roosevelt National Park
(North Dakota).





COIN COLLECTING 39
.Paper Money
Paper Money
Paper currency was created in China in the 14th century. The
Chinese printed paper money from a large wood-block impres-
sion depicting groups of “cash” coins, which were familiar to
people as currency.
As the European economy expanded in the 17th century,
merchants needed a convenient way to transport sums of money.
Paper documents let the merchants carry the equivalent of large
amounts of gold or silver over long distances in hazardous
conditions. In time, banks and national governments issued
paper notes to represent silver or gold held on deposit, and the
public gradually accepted these paper notes in transactions.
Paper Money
in America
The first paper money in the
American Colonies was produced
in Massachusetts in 1690,
followed by other Colonies in
1702, 1703, and 1709. It was
usually valued in English
pounds, shillings, and pence,
or sometimes in Spanish reals,
Milled dollars, or their fractions.
Printers used letterpress (with an
inked, raised surface) or intaglio (which used inked engraved
plates) printing to print the notes. Paul Revere engraved plates
for several issues of the notes of the Massachusetts and New
Hampshire Colonies.
Many of these notes used a second ink color or even
a third color in part of the design, to deter counterfeiting.
Benjamin Franklin developed a technique of using detailed
impressions of leaves as a design feature that was to be used for
more than 60 years.
Colonial bank note,
Colony of New Jersey


40 COIN COLLECTING
Paper Money.
Many of these notes paid interest and could be exchanged
or redeemed for their current value. Large circular holes
punched into the notes were just one of the ways to show
redemption. These cancelled notes were saved by the states
but were released to collectors as curios many years ago. They
account for many of the examples available to collectors today.
Civil War Paper Money
The federal government issued paper money on a large scale
for the first time in 1861. Because enormous sums were needed
to finance the Union’s fight against the Confederacy, the govern-
ment printed paper money in denominations from $1 through
$1,000. These “greenbacks,” nicknamed for the green ink on the
back, were the start of a national paper currency. The Union also
issued notes in denominations of 3 cents, 5 cents, 10 cents, 15
cents, 25 cents, and 50 cents. Collectors call these notes frac-
tional currency because they are fractions of a dollar. The
government printed them through 1876.
Colonial notes were printed in sheets of eight or 16
designs and then numbered and signed by hand,
usually by two or three—and sometimes as many as
six—people. They were then individually cut and
issued. Several members of the Continental Congress
and others who signed the Declaration of
Independence inked their names onto the paper money.
That’s Not Worth a Continental!
To finance the American Revolution, the Continental
Congress authorized the issue of paper money in
the form of certificates. These “Continentals”
had no backing in silver or gold, although it was
understood that the bearer was entitled to a
certain amount of gold or silver. As the war with
the British wore on, the Continental Congress
continued to print money and caused one of
the worst monetary depressions in America’s
history. People were lucky to redeem the
currency for only 21⁄2 cents on the dollar.


.Paper Money
The Confederacy also issued paper money during this time.
Like private bank notes or like some of the issues called broken
bank notes, early Confederate money was printed on one side
only. To thwart counterfeiters, notes were later printed with
designs on both sides. In 1862, the Confederate government
issued “bluebacks” that had blue engravings on the back. The
Union government encouraged counterfeiting of the Confederate
money to undermine the finances of the federal government.
Confederate currency, 1864
Obsolete or Broken
Bank Notes
Starting in the 1790s, but mainly
after the War of 1812, cities, banks,
and private companies printed paper
currency to promote commerce.
These notes were backed by nothing
but the success of the issuer. If a
particular bank closed, a holder of
that bank’s notes could not collect
any coin, or specie, from the bank.
During the financial panic of the
late 1830s, many of the issuers
went broke. Collectors call the
notes of this era “broken bank
notes.” After 1872, only the fed-
eral government could issue
legal tender paper currency.


42 COIN COLLECTING
Paper Money.
U.S. Federal Paper Currency
From 1861 to 1927, the federal government issued notes sized
approximately 71⁄4 by 31⁄8 inches. Collectors call them “large
size currency.” In 1928, the government reduced the size of
U.S. paper money to 6 1⁄4 by 21⁄2 inches. Collectors call this
“small size currency.” This is the size of our currency today.
Small Size Currency
Since the 1934C series, denominations above $100 have not been
printed. The $100,000 note was never intended for circulation, but only
for bank-to-bank transfers of large amounts of money.
Denominations Face Design Back Design
$1 George Washington Ornate (typeface) ONE
and U.S. Seal
$2 Thomas Jefferson Monticello (red seal) 1928–1957
$2 Thomas Jefferson Declaration of Independence
Signing (green seal) 1976–present
$5 Abraham Lincoln Lincoln Memorial
$10 Alexander Hamilton U.S. Treasury Building
$20 Andrew Jackson The White House
$50 Ulysses S. Grant U.S. Capitol Building
$100 Benjamin Franklin Independence Hall
$500 William McKinley Ornate (typeface)
FIVE HUNDRED
$1,000 Grover Cleveland Ornate (typeface)
ONE THOUSAND
$5,000 James Madison Ornate (typeface)
FIVE THOUSAND
$10,000 Salmon P. Chase Ornate (typeface)
TEN THOUSAND
$100,000 Woodrow Wilson Ornate (typeface)
ONE HUNDRED THOUSAND


COIN COLLECTING 43
.Paper Money
Today’s paper currency is printed in sheets of 32 subjects,
or notes. When notes are damaged in the printing process,
the full sheet is replaced with a sheet of notes bearing serial
numbers with a star as the suffix. These “star notes” are
quite collectible.
By matching the check letter and quadrant number on a
note to the chart shown here, you can determine the position of
the note on the uncut sheet of 32 subjects.
32-subject sheet with check letters and quadrant numbers
A1 E1 A2 E2
B1 F1 B2 F2
C1 G1 C2 G2
D1 H1 D2 H2
A3 E3 A4 E4
B3 F3 B4 F4
C3 G3 C4 G4
D3 H3 D4 H4


44 COIN COLLECTING
Paper Money.
The U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing produces all
federal paper currency. It has two facilities that print notes.
The first is in Washington, D.C., where the bureau
headquarters is located. The second is in Fort
Worth, Texas (opened in 1991). A note printed
in Fort Worth has a small FW next to the
face plate number.
U.S. Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Washington, D.C.
To prevent counterfeiting, the govern-
ment uses security measures such as
fine engraving, unique paper, special
inks, and watermarks. Paper money
now includes state-of-the art security
features such as embedded strips,
microprinting, and color-shifting ink.


COIN COLLECTING 45
.Paper Money
The Federal Reserve System
The Bureau of Engraving and Printing produces paper currency
based on amounts ordered by the Federal Reserve Board. It
ships 8 billion notes each year to the 12 Federal Reserve banks
and their 25 branch banks. Those 37 banks then distribute
coins and notes to commercial banks for the public to use.
The Federal Reserve System divides the country into
12 districts. A number and a letter on the bank note identify the
issuing Federal Reserve district.
Federal reserve districts, with corresponding numbers
and letters
1 A Boston, Massachusetts
2 B New York, New York
3 C Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
4 D Cleveland, Ohio
5 E Richmond, Virginia
6 F Atlanta, Georgia
7 G Chicago, Illinois
8 H St. Louis, Missouri
9 I Minneapolis, Minnesota
10 J Kansas City, Missouri
11 K Dallas, Texas
12 L San Francisco, California


46 COIN COLLECTING
Paper Money.
Noteworthy New Designs
Shady characters planning on printing their own money using
today’s high-tech layout software and color printers need to
think again. The U.S. government has introduced a series of
currency specially designed to protect the hard-earned money
of its public, and it plans to redesign paper currency every 7 to
10 years to keep foiling counterfeiters before they can crank up
the presses.
One of the latest notes to get a facelift is the $10 bill,
following the $20 and $50 bills. A new $5 bill design launched
in 2008. Let’s look at some of the features of the 10-spot.
1. Type of note. Whether Federal Reserve Note (the main paper money in
the United States), Silver Certificate, United States Note, or National
Currency, all notes will display their purpose in this general position.
2. Serial numbers. Each bill has two identical 11-character numbers.
The letter at the end of the serial number represents the print run cycle.
3. Federal Reserve indicators. The seal of the Federal Reserve System
(3A) is prominent on the face of every U.S. bill. The letter and number
printed underneath the serial number (3B) indicates the Federal Reserve
Bank that issued the note.
4. Check letter and quadrant number; series year and suffix letters.
The combination of a letter and a number (4A) indicates the bill’s posi-
tion on the full printed sheet of notes, before they were cut into the bills
we recognize. A new series year and suffix letter (4B) indicate a change
in the Secretary of the Treasury, the Treasurer of the United States, and/
or a redesign of the bill. For instance, when the “A” suffix was added to
the 2004 series year, this indicated a change in the Treasurer’s signature.
5. Signatures. The signatures of the Treasurer of the United States (5A)
and the Secretary of the Treasury (5B) must appear on a bill before it
is considered legal tender.
2
1
3A
4B
6
Face
3B
4A
5B5A
8
9
109
9
11 11
11
One of the most
obvious features
of the 2003 U.S.
currency series
is the color.
The bills sport
light background
colors in several
shades. The $10,
$20, and $50 bills
have had color
added.
7 (VISIBLE ONLY WHEN HELD UP TO A LIGHT)


COIN COLLECTING 47
.Paper Money
6. Watermark. In addition to Alexander Hamilton’s portrait printed on the
$10 bill, there is a watermark—a translucent design embedded in the
paper—as well. Hold the bill up to the light to see it from either side of
the note.
7. Security thread. While you have the bill held to the light, look for a
tiny strip running vertically just to the right of Hamilton’s portrait. You
might be able to make out the words “USA TEN” and a tiny American
flag printed on the thread. If you hold the bill under ultraviolet light,
the security thread will glow orange.
8. Color-shifting ink. Tilting the paper will make the numeral “10” in the
corner of the paper change color from copper to green.
9. Symbols of freedom. Two occurrences of the Statue of Liberty’s torch
are printed on the $10 bill in red ink: a large one in the background on
the left side of the bill, and a smaller one in metallic red on the lower
right. Also, the words “We the People,” from the U.S. Constitution, have
been printed to the right of the portrait.
10. Engraved portrait. Each bill has an engraved portrait of an American
statesman, and the $10 features Alexander Hamilton, the first Secretary
of the Treasury. In the redesigned bills, the portraits are enlarged, posi-
tioned off-center, and extended into the decorative border.
11. Microprinting. Get out your magnifying glass to better see the tiny
words printed on currency. On the $10 bill, you can find the words
“THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA” and “TEN DOLLARS” printed
below the portrait and along the left and right borders, and you can
find “USA” and the numeral “10” along the base of the large torch.
12. Low-vision feature. On the back of the bill, the denomination is
enlarged and printed in plain type to make it easy to read.
13. Historical vignette. The backs of paper currency feature an illustration
of an American symbol, a pivotal moment in U.S. history, or a historical
monument—in the case of the $10 bill, the U.S. Treasury building in
Washington, D.C.
Each denomination
of currency
features its
own symbol of
freedom. The
$20 bill features
an American
eagle, and the
$50 features the
American flag.
Back
12
6
13





COIN COLLECTING 49
.Tokens, Medals, and Decorations
Tokens, Medals,
and Decorations
Tokens, medals, and decorations serve unique purposes
and have a different kind of value from traditional coins.
Tokens
Tokens are substitutes for coins issued by merchants, city
governments, clubs, or individuals that normally do not have
the right to mint coins. The public understands their value.
A token, usually made of a base metal like copper or brass,
has no legal tender status. A token might carry a legend that
tells how the token can be used, such as for a car wash or
video game. But the people distributing and using a token
understand what its value is. Apart from its specific use, the
token is generally worthless unless it can be exchanged for
something else with someone who can use it.
Vintage tokens for a vending machine
and a game arcade
School award
medals


50 COIN COLLECTING
Tokens, Medals, and Decorations.
Some tokens do have monetary value and are used as
substitutes for real coins, such as the subway tokens used in
New York City. Others, like casino slot-machine tokens, are
redeemable for cash. A third kind of token, the store card,
is good for services or merchandise only.
Two special groups of tokens worth studying and collect-
ing are Hard Times tokens and Civil War tokens. An economic
downturn in the 1830s and during the Civil War led to a short-
age of small change, and copper tokens were manufactured
to provide emergency coins. The Hard Times tokens bear
politically inspired legends, while the Civil War tokens usually
exhibited patriotic themes. During the Civil War (1861–1865),
people hoarded silver and gold coins because they were
worried about the war’s outcome. With small change scarce,
merchants in the North issued store tokens, and others
produced generic tokens with patriotic slogans. Collectors
like the merchant tokens for their regional interest and the
patriotic tokens for their national appeal.
Medals
Medals are usually privately issued and have no monetary
value. They are generally large, usually round metal objects
struck as awards, commemorative items, or art pieces.
Award metals recognize achievements such as long service,
heroic acts, or sports victories. Commemorative medals
honor people, events, and places. Art medals are created
for aesthetic purposes.
Don’t Take Any Wooden Nickels!
At one time, wooden nickels were used as
currency at state fairs. Local town merchants
accepted the tokens and gave them back as
change because everyone could spend them
at the fair. But as the event drew to a close,
storekeepers quit taking the wooden nickels
because they knew they might not have a
chance to cash them in before the fair ended.
National Scout Jamboree wooden nickel


COIN COLLECTING 51
.Tokens, Medals, and Decorations
Orders and Decorations
Orders and decorations are awards presented to
individuals for service to a country or organization,
which often includes heroism and participation in
military actions. Orders are presentations by a ruler
or president, for distinguished service. Because they
are meant to be worn, decorations come in many
forms such as badges, stars, and sashes.
Many medals, such as this Charles Schulz memorial
medal, are available from the U.S. Mint. You can
request a complete list of medals that are available.
BSA’s Heroism Award medal





COIN COLLECTING 53
.Building Your Own Collection; Proper Storage Techniques
Building Your
Own Collection; Proper
Storage Techniques
Collect what pleases you—within your budget. You will learn a
great deal about history and politics by collecting common
coins, tokens, or paper money. You can also find out a lot about
investing by studying rare coins. And you will certainly find out
about economics when you try to buy a coin.
To complete the
merit badge
requirements, you will
assemble a set of
examples of the
currently available
circulating coins of the
United States. For the
completion of the
optional requirements,
you will need to
collect and identify
world coins, paper
money or examples of
medals and tokens.


54 COIN COLLECTING
Building Your Own Collection; Proper Storage Techniques.
What Determines Value?
Three factors usually determine the value of a numismatic object:
• Rarity—how many like items exist and are available to acquire
• Condition—the state of preservation
• Demand—how many people want it
A fourth factor is the metal content. This is a coin’s
intrinsic value. An item that is not rare, in good condition, or
in high demand might be expensive just because of the value
of the gold or silver metal in it. The metal value establishes a
base, or floor value.
Let’s say a coin had a mintage in the millions and many
examples are still available in the highest condition, but only
a hundred people want to buy the coin. Because the supply is
high and demand low, it would not cost much to buy the coin,
and you would not get much if you sold it.
As a collector, keep records of all your numismatic
purchases and sales. Keep a file of your receipts. Create an
inventory ledger for your collection. Be sure to include the
amount paid, the date, the seller or buyer, and a useful
description of the item or items. This information will help
you track your costs. It might also be required for tax
purposes when the value increases and for identification
if the collection is lost or stolen.


COIN COLLECTING 55
.Building Your Own Collection; Proper Storage Techniques
The Condition of Coins
One of the most important elements in determining the value
of an item is its condition, or how well it has been preserved.
The Official ANA Grading Standards for United States Coins,
published by the American Numismatic Association, is the
accepted reference on grading and offers complete details
and illustrations of coins in each grade.
If only a few coins of a type are available and they are
not in good condition, but hundreds of collectors are
interested in them, the price will be high. If one of those
coins is of the best condition and in high demand,
record price levels could very well be reached each
time it is offered.
Uncirculated (UNC) Extremely Fine (EF) Very Fine (VF)
Good (G)
Different grades of the same coin
Very Good (VG)Fine (F)


56 COIN COLLECTING
Building Your Own Collection; Proper Storage Techniques.
Since the mid-1980s, some professional authentication
and grading services have provided a service of grading a coin
or paper currency and encapsulating it, along with an identifi-
cation card, within a sealed plastic holder commonly referred
to as a slab. This practice is intended to reduce disagreements
over grade. These services are commonly called third-party
grading services, which implies that the service provider does
not have an ownership interest in the coin or currency note
being graded and is likely to give a neutral and fair opinion of
the item’s condition.
A more refined grading scale was developed in the
1970s and is used extensively by grading services to
provide additional grading information within the
lettergrade scale. This grading scale is called Mint State
(or MS) and assigns a number from 1 to 70.
Uncirculated (UNC) (MS-60 – MS-70). A coin that looks
as new as the day it was minted. No evidence of any
wear.
Extremely Fine (EF) (MS-40 – MS-58). A coin that has
every appearance of being in perfect condition, with the
exception of very minor flaws or slight wear on high
design points.
Very Fine (VF) (MS20 – MS-35). A coin that shows signs
of having been in circulation, with the highest points on
the coin design noticeably flattened from wear. It still
has fine details in the remaining portions of the design
and no disfiguring nicks or scratches.
Fine (F) (MS-12 – MS-15). A coin worn from
considerable use. Many parts of the coin, including the
outer raised rim, are rounded or flattened from wear;
minor nicks and blemishes are visible. The overall
appearance, however, is still pleasing, and all major
details show clearly.
Very Good (VG) (MS-8 – MS-10). A coin that shows
much wear on the design and surface, although the
legends are still readable. The rim is very flat.
Good (G) (MS-4 – MS-8). A coin that is so worn that
most of the details are flat.
Poor (P) (MS-1 – MS-3). A coin that is holed, badly
scratched, bent dented, or worn so much that its type is
unidentifiable or barely identifiable.
Source: American Numismatic Association
As a collector,
you should
buy the best
grade available
that is within
your budget.


COIN COLLECTING 57
.Building Your Own Collection; Proper Storage Techniques
Cleaning, Care, and Storage
Should you clean your coins? Resist the temptation. Never clean
proof or uncirculated coins. However, if you want to get some
grime off circulated coins, use liquid soap diluted with water.
Then pat dry with a soft cloth. Wiping or rubbing a coin will
leave surface hairlines that are noticeable under magnification.
Cleaning coins with abrasives or silver polish will leave
scratches on the surface and chemicals in the recessed areas
of the design. Abrasives give the surface an unnatural color
and can greatly decrease the numismatic value of the coin.
How you store your coins affects their condition and,
ultimately, their value. Coins tossed on a table, carried
loosely in your pocket, or jumbled together in a felt bag
will pick up scratches and nicks. Always hold a coin by
the edge, never by the coin’s flat faces where finger-
prints can easily damage the surfaces. Over time, oils
from the skin will react with the metal.
Cleaning coins
using a dipping
solution will leave
the coin with an
unnaturally bright
appearance.
These acids can
etch the surface
and damage
the coin.


58 COIN COLLECTING
Building Your Own Collection; Proper Storage Techniques.
Choose a way to store your coins based on the condition
and value of your collection: The better the condition of your
coins, the more specialized the protection should be. Some
collectors house their coins in slabs and store them in safe-
deposit boxes. Do not use products (such as plastic sandwich
bags, plastic envelopes, or brown paper envelopes) that contain
sulfur, acids, foam rubber, oily substances, and polyvinyl
chloride (PVC); they will ruin your coins. Special polyester
film is a commonly used safe and clear material.
Be sure to keep valuable coins and paper money in a safe
and secure place, away from moisture and heat, and out of
direct sunlight.
Pressed-cardboard coin albums, the most popular storage hold-
ers, allow coins to be viewed from one or both sides. They are
appropriate for inexpensive coins gathered from circulation.


COIN COLLECTING 59
.Building Your Own Collection; Proper Storage Techniques
These white cardboard 2-by-2-inch holders have clear film-
covered slots the size of common circulating coins. A coin is
placed inside the holder, then the cardboard is folded over
and stapled to hold the coin in place. Descriptive information
can be recorded on the holder. These holders can be stored in
made-to-fit boxes.
Plastic 2-by-2-inch holders, often called “flips,” have one pouch to
hold the coin and another to hold identification. Close the holder
by flipping, or folding, it over.





COIN COLLECTING 61
.Great Coin Collections on Display
Great Coin Collections
on Display
As you learn more about numismatics, you might want to see
some of the great coins of the world for yourself. Or maybe you
have realized that you have a special interest in a particular part
of the coin collecting hobby. As you put your own collection
together, you will enjoy discovering how great collections have
been assembled.
Specialty collectors have their own collections organizations
and publications. Some of those include transit tokens, modern
art medals, copper coins of the Colonial era, paper money, and
patterns. You should be able to find a collection of whatever
interests you. If not, start your own.
The American Numismatic Association, the largest
membership organization in the world for coin
collectors, houses a public display of coins, medals,
and paper money in its museum in
Colorado Springs, Colorado.
The American Numismatic
Society, located in New York City,
has a research collection and library.
The National Numismatic
Collection at the Smithsonian
Institution in Washington, D.C., is
featured in a special exhibition area
in the Museum of American History. The archives of the
Bureau of Engraving and Printing are housed at the
Smithsonian. The Higgins Museum of National Bank
Notes is open each summer in Okoboji, Iowa. And the
Durham Museum in Omaha, Nebraska, has the Byron
Reed collection of ancient coins and more.


62 COIN COLLECTING
Coin Collecting Resources.
Scouting Literature
Collections and Stamp Collecting merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Breen, Walter H. Walter Breen’s
Complete Encyclopedia of U.S. and
Colonial Coins. Doubleday, 1988.
Bressett, Ken, and Abe Kasoff, eds. and
comps. The Official A.N.A. Grading
Standards for United States Coins,
7th ed. Whitman Publishing, 2013.
Bruce II, Colin R., and Thomas
Michael. 2017 Standard Catalog of
World Coins: 2001–Date. Krause
Publications, 2016.
Cuhaj, George S., ed. Standard Catalog
of United States Paper Money, 31st
ed. Krause Publications, 2012.
———. Standard Catalog of World
Coins, 1601–1700, 6th ed. Krause
Publications, 2014.
———. Standard Catalog of World
Coins, 1701–1800, 6th ed. Krause
Publications, 2013.
———. Standard Catalog of World
Coins, 1801–1900, 8th ed. Krause
Publications, 2015.
———. Standard Catalog of World Paper
Money: Modern Issues 1961–Present,
12th ed. Krause Publications, 2014.
Edler, Joel T., and David C. Harper,
eds. U.S. Coin Digest: The Complete
Guide to Current Market Values.
Krause Publications, 2017.
Harper, David C., ed. 2017 North
American Coins and Prices:
A Guide to U.S., Canadian,
and Mexican Coins, 26th ed.
Krause Publications, 2016.
Michael, Thomas. 2017 Standard
Catalog of World Coins: 1901–2001,
44th ed. Krause Publications, 2016.
Ruddy, James F. Photograde: A
Photographic Grading Encyclopedia
for United States Coins, 18th ed.
St. Martin’s Press, 1996.
Slabaugh, Arlie R. Confederate
States Paper Money. Krause
Publications, 2008.
Yeoman, R. S. A Guide Book of
United States Coins, 70th ed.
Whitman Publishing, 2016.
Coin Collecting Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


COIN COLLECTING 63
.Coin Collecting Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Numismatic Association
818 N. Cascade Ave.
Colorado Springs, CO 80903
www.money.org
American Numismatic Society
75 Varick St., 11th Floor
New York, NY 10013
www.numismatics.org
National Numismatic Collection
National Museum of American History
14th Street and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, DC 20560
americanhistory.si.edu/collections/
numismatics
Society of Paper Money Collectors
www.spmc.org
Society of U.S. Pattern Collectors
www.uspatterns.com
U.S. Bureau of Engraving
and Printing
14th and C Streets, SW
Washington, DC 20228
www.bep.gov
U.S. Mint
Customer Care Center
801 Ninth St., NW
Washington, DC 20220
www.usmint.gov
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
George Cuhaj of the editorial staff of
the Standard Catalog of World Coins
for his assistance and dedication in
updating the Coin Collecting merit
badge pamphlet.
We also extend thanks to the
American Numismatic Association,
Stack’s Rare Coins, and Krause
Publications, and to individuals David
C. Kranz, Thomas Michael, Lee Hartz,
Tom Casper, and Bill Hodges for their
contributions to this pamphlet.
Thanks to the United States Mint,
in particular Angela Hicks, for the use
of their images.
The Boy Scouts of America is
grateful to the men and women serv-
ing on the National Merit Badge
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System, courtesy—page 45
George Cuhaj, courtesy—pages 10 and 11
Heritage Auctions/HA.com courtesy—
page 16 (essai coin)
iStock/Getty Images—page 31 (penny)
Krause Publications, Iola, Wisconsin; and
Stack’s Rare Coins, New York, New
York, courtesy—pages 7, 16
(proof, trial strike), 17 (all), 20 (all),
21 (Lydian stater), 23 (all), 25 (coins),
26 (all), 27 (coins), 28 (coin), 30–31
(all except penny), 32 (Peace dollar),
34, 35 (silver half dollar), 39, 41 (all),
51 (Schulz medal), and 55 (all)
United States coin production images
provided by the United States Mint—
cover (coin hubs), pages 12–14 (all),
15 (coin bags, quarter), 16 (Jefferson
nickel), 24 (commemorative coins),
29 (all), 36 (all), and 37 (all)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts of
America.
Brian Payne—pages 4, 6 (main), 54,
and 60–61
Randy Piland—pages 53 and 57


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.