COMPOSITE
MATERIALSSTEM-Ba s e d


COMPOSITE
MATERIALS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35877
ISBN 978-0-8395-2165-5
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Composite-Materials or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.


4 COMPOSITE MATERIALS


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 5
Note to the Counselor
Many useful, everyday products are made of composite materials. Earning the
Composite Materials merit badge gives Scouts a chance to learn about composites:
what they are, how they are made, and how they are used. Scouts have the
opportunity to put their new knowledge into practice as they create items using
composite materials.
This opportunity poses some inherent safety and health concerns. A Scout
working on the Composite Materials merit badge will be exposed to hazardous
materials. The risk must not be taken lightly, but neither should the Scout be afraid
of learning to work with hazardous materials. This merit badge can be earned
safely and without harm to participants’ health. Be sure the Scout receives proper
instruction in the use and handling of composite materials from a competent and
responsible adult who is knowledgeable about composites.
Encourage all Scouts to use safety data sheets (SDS) to learn how to protect
themselves from harm. Simply reading an SDS, however, may not fully prepare a
Scout to handle the health and safety concerns of working with a particular
hazardous material. You, as the counselor, must be thoroughly familiar with all the
hazardous materials used in the projects the Scout selects, and ensure that the
Scout fully understands those hazards.
These materials have a powerful smell. To protect Scouts from overexposure to
chemical vapors, make sure all projects are done outdoors in a large open area to
prevent a buildup of chemical vapors. Solvents, such as acetone, are flammable
and must be kept away from all potential sources of ignition, such as electrical
tools, fans, flames, and sparks.
Be sure all participants have the appropriate personal protective equipment,
including body, hand, and eye/face protection and foot coverings. Protective clothing
not only prevents exposure to hands, eyes, and face, but also keeps hazardous materi-
als from contaminating street clothes.
It is highly recommended that Scouts work in small groups of two or three
on their projects. As with all merit badge projects, work for this merit badge must be
done under qualified adult supervision to ensure that Scouts take a careful, disciplined
approach. With the proper care, precautions, and supervision, Scouts can safely enjoy
learning a new skill.
It is highly recommended that all composite materials–
related activities are carried out in groups of two or
three Scouts. Conduct the projects outdoors, where
there is plenty of fresh air.


SpaceShipOne
SpaceShipOne during initial assembly, far right. The project, which was
funded solely by Microsoft cofounder Paul G. Allen, led to the world’s
first privately piloted spacecraft to fly beyond Earth’s atmosphere. The
small, round windows on SpaceShipOne help minimize its weight and
structure load and allow the pilot to view the horizon while in flight.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 7
SpaceShipOne photos courtesy ©2004 Mojave Aerospace Ventures LLC,
by David M. Moore. SpaceShipOne is a Paul G. Allen Project.
Contents
What Are Composite Materials? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
The History of Composites . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Why Use Composites? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
How Are Composites Made? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Safety and Environmental Awareness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Your Composites Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Careers in the Composites Industry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Composite Materials Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78





.What Are Composite Materials?
What Are Composite
Materials?
Composite materials are all around you, though you probably
don’t call them that. Composites make bicycles and skis lighter,
kayaks and canoes stronger, houses warmer, and helmets
tougher. You can find composites just about everywhere:
in airplanes and sports cars, golf clubs and guitars, boats and
baseball bats, bathtubs and circuit boards, and even bridges.
So what are composites?
Generally speaking, a composite is a combination of differ-
ent components or elements. In photography, for example,
combining many individual photographs into one picture creates
a composite photograph. In the movie business, a film with the
picture and the soundtrack side by side on the same strand of
film is a composite print.
For your work on the Composite Materials merit badge,
however, think of a composite as a material made from two
or more different materials that, when combined, are stronger
than those individual materials by themselves.
Composites can be natural or synthetic. Wood, a natural
composite, is a combination of wood fibers and a substance
called lignin. The fibers give the wood its strength; lignin is a
kind of natural glue that binds the fibers together.
Definitions of
words shown in
bold print appear
in the glossary
at the back of
this pamphlet.


10 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
What Are Composite Materials?.
Other composites are synthetic (artificial or made by
humans), and many of those have been around for thousands
of years. Ancient peoples around the globe made adobe bricks,
combining straw and mud to form a composite that is stronger
than either the straw or the mud by itself. Modern builders may
use steel and concrete—a combination that makes building
materials strong and stiff.
When Scout troops travel to the Philmont Scout Ranch
in northern New Mexico, they sometimes stop by the
Taos Pueblo, about 50 miles away. The Pueblo Indians
began constructing their settlement’s main buildings
out of adobe between A.D. 1000 and 1450, long before
Christopher Columbus arrived in America. Those build-
ings still stand today.
The adobe bricks
used to build walls
in some ancient
civilizations were
one of the first
composite materials.


.What Are Composite Materials?
The composite materials you will learn about for this merit
badge are combinations of fibers and “glue,” basically similar
to wood or adobe brick. Modern composites, however, have
unique and valuable properties that put them far ahead of
historical versions. This pamphlet will introduce you to those
properties or qualities, show you where and how composites
are used, and take you through the steps to make your own
composites products.


Adobe bricks being made, circa 1943


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 13
.The History of Composites
The History of
Composites
Thousands of years ago, the ancient
Egyptians combined mud and straw
to make adobe bricks. Mongol warriors
in the 12th century made archery bows
of composite materials. Over a core of
bamboo, animal tendons were placed
on the tension side (the outer surface),
and horn on the compression side
(the inner surface). This lay-up was
tightly wrapped with silk, and the entire
bow sealed with pine resin. With these
superior bows, archers could hit targets
from 490 yards (the length of nearly five
football fields). Some of these bows, now
more than 900 years old, were tested by
a museum and found to be almost as
strong as modern composite bows.
Modern Composites
Leo Baekeland, a chemist, introduced the modern era of
composites in 1907 with his creation of Bakelite, one of
the first synthetic resins. The resin itself was very brittle.
However, Dr. Baekeland found that combining cellulose
with Bakelite created a substance that was stronger and less
brittle. The first commercial use of this new composite was
to make gearshift knobs for the 1917 Rolls Royce automobile.
Mongol warrior with
his bow drawn


14 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
The History of Composites.
During the 1920s and 1930s, new and better resins were
created. Then, in the late 1930s, the Owens-Illinois company
developed a process for drawing glass into thin strands or
fibers. These new glass fibers, when combined with the newer
synthetic (polyester) resins, produced strong and lightweight
composites. One of the first products to be made with these
new composites was a boat hull, manufactured in the 1930s
using fiberglass fabric and polyester resin.
Resins act as the
glue that holds
composites
together. A natural
resin that you
probably know
is pine resin.
Different types of
resins that are
used in composite
materials are
covered in the
“How Are
Composites
Made?” chapter.
Cellulose is a substance that strengthens the stems and
leaves of trees and other plants. Wood is about half
cellulose. All fruits and vegetables contain cellulose. The
stiff stalks of celery, for example, are rich in cellulose.
Glass fibers


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 15
.The History of Composites
The new composites industry developed further during
World War II. The military was looking for any material that
could reduce weight while improving strength and offering
good resistance to weather and the corrosive effects of salt
air and water. The U.S. Air Force and Navy made good use of
these properties of composites in many aircraft and watercraft.
After the war, the use of composites grew quickly. Boats,
trucks, sports cars, storage tanks, pipes, and ducts—almost
anything imaginable—were
built using composites.
The processes developed
during this period are
still used today, with
some minor improvements
or modifications.


Fishing poles made with modern composites are extremely flexible and durable.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 17
.Why Use Composites?
Why Use Composites?
Modern composites are often used as strong, lightweight
replacements for traditional materials such as metal and wood.
In many ways, wood is a great building material. It is strong,
abundant, and relatively light. But it has some disadvantages.
It is much stronger along the grain than across. It can twist
and warp. And it swells and shrinks as humidity changes.
Wood can rot, and metal can rust or corrode. Metal can
also suffer from fatigue—it may weaken or fail under
repeated stress.
Metals, Wood, and
Composites Compared
The chart on the following
pages shows similarities
and differences among
composites and
other materials. COPPER
STEEL
WOOD
ALUMINUM
COMPOSITES


18 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Material Aluminum Copper Steel Wood Composites
Physical and
Mechanical
Properties
• Soft and weak in
pure form; can
be strong as
steel when mixed
with copper,
zinc, magnesium,
and other
elements to form
alloys
• Lightweight—a
third the weight
of steel
• Very good
strength-
to-weight ratio
• Easily formed
and shaped
• Easily drawn
into wires
• Heats and cools
quickly and
evenly
• Nonmagnetic
• Soft and weak
in pure form;
stronger when
mixed with zinc
(to make brass)
and tin (to make
bronze)
• About three
times heavier
than aluminum
• Low strength-to-
weight ratio
• Easily formed
and shaped
• Easily drawn
into wires
• Excellent
conductor of
heat
• Nonmagnetic
• Strong, hard,
durable
• Heavy
• Can be brittle
unless properly
hardened
• Good strength-
to-weight ratio
• Can be cast,
rolled, forged,
and otherwise
shaped
• Average
conductor of
heat
• Magnetic
• Soft and weak
to hard and
strong,
depending on
species
• Lightweight
(balsa, pine)
to heavy (oak,
ash) depending
on species
• Elastic, flexible
• Low to good
strength-to-
weight ratio
• Can be shaped
by cutting,
chiseling,
planing, etc.; not
routinely cast or
molded
• Poor conductor
of heat
• Nonmagnetic
• Strong, tough,
durable; can be
made stronger in
a specific
direction (unlike
metals, which
have equal
strength in all
directions)
• Lightweight
• Stiff, crush-
resistant, stable
• Highest strength-
to-weight ratios
• Can be molded
into complex
shapes
• Can be shaped
with standard
carpentry tools
• Poor conductor
of heat (insulator)
• Nonmagnetic


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 19
Material Aluminum Copper Steel Wood Composites
Electrical
Properties
Good conductor
of electricity
Excellent conductor
of electricity
Conductive Nonconductive Nonconductive
(can be made
conductive in some
applications)
Corrosion
Resistance
• Does not tarnish
or rust
• Resists corrosion
in salt water
Does not rust;
weathering gives a
green patina that
protects against
further corrosion
Rusts unless given
a corrosion-
resistant finish or
coating,
or alloyed as in
stainless steel
Rots, splits, warps;
vulnerable to
insects unless
treated
Resists weathering
and chemical
corrosion
Flammability • Noncombustible
• Does not produce
sparks when
struck
• Does not emit
hazardous fumes
when heated
• Noncombustible
• Does not produce
sparks when
struck
• Does not emit
hazardous fumes
when heated
• Noncombustible
• Produces sparks
when struck
• Does not emit
hazardous fumes
when heated
• Combustible
• Emits hazardous
fumes and smoke
when burned
• Combustible
• Emits hazardous
fumes and smoke
when burned
• Some composite
materials are
resistant to fire,
or chemical
additives are
used in the
materials to lower
the effects of
smoke and
flame spread.


20 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Material Aluminum Copper Steel Wood Composites
Cost Relatively high,
compared with
steel
Relatively high,
compared with
steel
Relatively low to
high, depending
on grade of steel
Low to high,
depending on
species
Low to high,
depending on
types of materials
used and the
application
Other Properties Easily recycled,
and no limit to the
number of times
aluminum can
be recycled
Easily recycled Recyclable Renewable
resource
• Thermoplastic
composites can
be recycled.
• Some
composites use
natural fibers or
sources for resin
that could
be recycled.
• Composites
require low
consumption of
energy to produce
materials and
products.
• Thermosets and
many hybrid
thermoplastic
composites are
not recycled but
can be burned for
their energy
content.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 21
Material Aluminum Copper Steel Wood Composites
Typical Uses • Beverage cans,
bottle caps, foil
pouches and
wrappers
• Aircraft,
automobiles,
trucks, railcars
• Saucepans,
cookware
• Long-distance
high-voltage
power lines
• Outdoor products
(aluminum siding,
roofing, storm
windows, rain
gutters, lawn
furniture, license
plates)
• Electrical and
telephone wiring
in homes,
factories, offices
• Motors,
generators
• Plumbing pipes,
gas lines,
electrical
conduits,
radiators
• Cookware
• Roofing
• Decorative
objects, jewelry
• Vehicles,
machinery, tools
• Structural beams,
girders
• Railroad rails
• Bridges
• Ship hulls
• Storage tanks
• Cookware,
flatware
• Surgical
instruments
• Nails, bolts,
screws
• Building
construction
• Railroad ties
• Telephone poles
• Furniture,
cabinets, trim
• Tool handles
• Musical
instruments
• Sports
equipment, oars,
paddles
• Picture frames
• Crafts, carvings
• Aircraft
• Utility poles
• Automotive parts
• Tool handles
• Recreational
watercraft
• Storage tanks
• Sports equipment
• Pipe
• Building
construction
• Doors
• Tubs, showers
• Wind turbine
blades
• Helmets,
protective gear
• Circuit boards
• Bulletproof
panels
• Artificial limbs
• Satellites
• Theme park rides
• Military
equipment
• Pools
• Bridge decks


22 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Why Use Composites?.
Composites can be manufactured to have properties differ-
ent from other materials, properties that can offer advantages
over traditional materials. Here are examples of those properties.
LIGHT WEIGHT
Composites are light in weight, compared with most woods and
metals. Their lightness is important in automobiles and aircraft,
for example, where less weight means better lift and better
fuel efficiency (more miles to the gallon). People who design
airplanes are greatly concerned with weight, since reducing a
craft’s weight reduces the amount of fuel it needs and increases
the speeds it can reach. Some modern airplanes are built with
more composites than metal.
HIGH STRENGTH AND STIFFNESS
Composites can be designed to be far stronger than aluminum
or steel. Metals are equally strong in all directions. But compos-
ites can be engineered and designed to be strong in a specific
direction. For the same weight, composites can be four to six
times stronger than steel. Because of the ability to design
stiffness into composites, they can be made lighter than many
metal structures and still not bend under loads.
Composites can be made to resist bending in one direction,
for example. When something is built with metal, and greater
strength is needed in one direction, the material usually must
be made thicker, which adds weight. A composite can be strong
without being heavy. Composites have the highest strength-to-
weight ratios in structures today.
Metals are
isotropic,
meaning they
have uniform
properties in
all directions.
Composites are
anisotropic,
having different
properties in
different directions.


.Why Use Composites?
HIGH-IMPACT STRENGTH
Composites can be made to
absorb impacts—the sudden
wallop of a bullet, for
instance, or the blast from
an explosion. Because of
this property, composites
are used in bulletproof
vests and panels and to
shield airplanes, buildings,
and military vehicles
from explosions.
CORROSION RESISTANCE
Because they do not rust or
corrode, composites resist
damage from the weather
and from harsh chemicals
that can eat away at other
materials. They are good choices to use where chemicals are
handled or stored. Outdoors, they stand up to severe weather
and wide changes in temperature.
Strength Related to Weight
Strength-to-weight ratio is a material’s strength in relation to how much
it weighs. Some materials are very strong and heavy, such as steel.
Other materials can be strong and light, such as bamboo poles.
Composite materials can be designed to be both strong and light.
This property is why composites are used to build airplanes, which
need a very high strength material at the lowest possible weight.
Bulletproof vest


24 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Why Use Composites?.
DESIGN FLEXIBILITY
Composites can be molded into
complicated shapes more easily
than most other materials. This
gives designers the freedom to
create almost any shape or form.
Most recreational boats today, for
example, are built from fiberglass
composites because these materi-
als can easily be molded into
complex shapes, which improve
boat design while lowering costs.
The surface of composites can
also be molded to mimic any
surface finish or texture, from
smooth to pebbly.
PART CONSOLIDATION
A single piece made of composite materials can replace an
entire assembly of metal parts. Reducing the number of parts
in an automobile or a structure saves time and cuts down on
the maintenance needed over the life of the item.
DIMENSIONAL STABILITY
Composites retain their shape and size when they are hot or
cool, wet or dry. Wood, on the other hand, swells and shrinks
as the humidity changes. Composites can be a better choice in
situations demanding tight fits that do not vary. They are used
in aircraft wings, for example, so that the wing shape and size
do not change as the plane gains or loses altitude.
CONDUCTIVITY
Composites are nonconductive, meaning they do not conduct
electricity. This property makes them suitable for such items
as electrical utility poles and the circuit boards in electronics.
If electrical conductivity is needed, it is possible to make some
composites conductive.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 25
MAGNETISM
Most composites contain no metals and, therefore, are not
magnetic. They can be used around sensitive electronic
equipment. The lack of magnetic interference also lets
the large magnets used in hospital MRI (magnetic
resonance imaging) equipment perform better with
composites. MRIs produce computer images of
organs and tissues inside the patient’s body,
allowing doctors to see inside without surgery.
RADAR TRANSPARENCY
Radar signals pass right through composites, a property that
makes composites ideal materials for use anywhere radar
equipment is operating, whether on the ground or in the
air. Composites play a key role in stealth aircraft, such as
the U.S. Air Force’s B-2 stealth bomber, which is nearly
invisible to radar.
LOW THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY
Composites are good insulators—they do not easily conduct heat
or cold. They are used in buildings for doors, panels, and windows
where extra protection is needed from extreme temperatures.
DURABILITY
Structures made of composites have a long life and need
little maintenance. We do not know how long composites
last, because we have not come to the end of the life of
many original composites. Many composites have been in
service for half a century.
In 1947, the U.S. Coast Guard built 40-foot patrol
boats using fiberglass composite materials. These
boats were used until the early 1970s, when they
were taken out of service because the design was
outdated. After the boats were decommissioned,
the composites were thoroughly tested and found
to have lost only 2 to 3 percent of their original
strength during 25 years of hard service.
Composites are
good materials for
building radomes
(radar domes),
which are the
bubbles or nose
cones that enclose
airborne or
ground-based
radar equipment.
.
RADOME


26 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Why Use Composites?.
Where Are Composites Used?
You have seen some of the ways that composites are used. Here
are more examples, several of which you might find surprising.
Aircraft and spacecraft. Composite materials are used in new
experimental planes and military drones (unmanned aircraft). In
space, composites were used in oxygen tanks for Skylab, the first
U.S. space station. NASA is exploring new uses for composites in
future missions. A company called Scaled Composites used the
materials in building the world’s first privately owned spacecraft,
which made two altitude record-setting flights in 2004.
Bicycles. Bicycles made with composite materials are much
lighter than bikes that have metal frames. The road bikes
ridden in racing events such as the Tour de France weigh as
little as 15 pounds—the minimum the rules allow.
Artificial limbs made of composite materials can be formed
to closely resemble their human counterparts or to improve
function, such as this runner’s foot. Pictured here, Marlon
Shirley is the Paralympic world record holder in the 100m run.
Elation™
foot covers
Cheetah®
custom foot
©Ossur, courtesy; www.ossur.com/en-us; Cheetah® custom foot and Elation™ foot covers


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 27
.Why Use Composites?
Boats. The most prevalent use of composites has been in the
marine industry. Composites have replaced wood and alumi-
num in many of today’s recreational watercraft. In military
applications, ships are being designed with composites to
give them stealth qualities. Other marine applications of
composites include minesweepers, sonar domes, and even
personal watercraft.
Buildings. Doors, window frames, countertops, tubs, showers,
domes, towers, and other structures are made of composites.
Used on the outside of buildings, composite materials may be
made to look like stone, concrete, or even wood.
Cars. In sports cars and other vehicles, composites are found
in fenders, wheel wells, hoods, and floors. Used in body panels
and truck beds, and even under the hood, composites reduce
the number of individual parts and make vehicles lighter,
which makes them more fuel efficient. Top fuel dragsters, funny
cars, and other race cars have strong, light composite bodies.
Communications satellites. Satellites in space undergo huge
shifts in temperature, from searing heat to subzero cold, which
can cause materials to expand and contract. Rather than use a
material like aluminum for antenna parts, manufacturers use
composites that do not expand and contract as much.
Musical instruments. Traditional wooden guitars
can shrink or swell as the humidity changes. Guitars
made of composites can avoid this problem and
still mimic the sound qualities of wooden guitars.
Racing helmets. Race-car drivers wear helmets
made of tough, shatterproof, lightweight
composites. The excellent impact strength
of composites (along with a lot of other
safety gear) helps drivers to survive crashes
at 200 mph.
Sports equipment. Composites are replacing
wood and metal in fishing rods, tennis rackets,
kayak paddles, windsurfing masts and boards,
hockey sticks, baseball and softball bats, golf
clubs, archery compound bows, and many
other kinds of sports gear. Olympic athletes
use equipment made of composites for their
lightweight and strength qualities.
The first Chevrolet
Corvette in 1953
had a fiberglass
body. Today’s
models continue
to use composites
extensively, using
carbon-fiber front
fenders, wheel
wells, and hoods.
Composites are used in
the shell of this replica
motocross helmet.





COMPOSITE MATERIALS 29
.How Are Composites Made?
How Are
Composites Made?
Composites are made from three basic ingredients
or components:
• Fibers—the reinforcements that carry loads and
give composites their strength
• Resins—the polymer (plastic) or glue that holds
the fiber reinforcements and the composite
together, protects the fibers from the environment,
and transfers loads between the fibers
• Fillers and additives—ingredients that give
composite materials special properties
Composites are shaped in or on molds. A common
technique is to laminate (layer) resin and reinforcements
onto a lightweight core material such as balsa wood.
Engineers and designers can choose from many types of
resins and fibers to create composites with specific properties
for specific uses. Let’s take a closer look at each of these ingre-
dients, then at the methods for molding them.
For this merit badge, we define composites as
“a material that is made up of two or more
materials that, when combined, are stronger
than the individual materials.” Another term for
composites is reinforced plastics. The composites
industry uses a more specific term: fiber-reinforced
polymer (FRP) composites. A polymer is a chemical
compound made of many identical components linked
together in a chain. “Polymer” and “resin” are inter-
changeable terms, so in this pamphlet we use the more
familiar word, resin.
Fiberglass cloth


30 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
How Are Composites Made?.
Resins
Resins used in composites can be either thermoset or
thermoplastic. Thermoset resins are changed from
a liquid to a solid in an irreversible process called
crosslinking. A thermoset resin cannot be melted
and reused. Thermoplastic resins, on the other hand,
can be remelted and recycled; the hardening process
is reversible.
THERMOSET RESINS
Thermoplastics are the typical plastics we are familiar with at
home and at school. This includes toys, plastic containers of all
types, and hundreds of common items we use every day.
Common thermoset resins include polyester, vinyl ester, and
epoxy. Each of these has different properties.
Polyester resins are the most commonly used because they
are low in cost and are suitable for many products. They are
tough and resistant to most solvents (liquids such as acetone
that can dissolve substances), but polyester resins can be
damaged by certain solvents and by ultraviolet light.
Epoxy resin is tough, nonconductive, resistant to chemicals,
and dimensionally stable. Exposure to sunlight can degrade it.
Epoxies are more expensive than polyester and vinyl ester
resins and are more difficult to produce.
Vinyl esters are chemically similar to polyester and epoxy
resins. They are a sort of compromise between the two, combin-
ing polyester’s low cost and ease of use with epoxy resin’s
toughness and other desirable properties. Vinyl ester resin might
be used if a product needs to resist corrosion. Like polyester,
vinyl ester is used mainly in glass fiber–reinforced composites.
THERMOPLASTIC RESINS
Thermoplastics are the typical plastics that surround you at
home and school, including toys, plastic containers of all types,
and hundreds of common items we use every day.
Common thermoplastic resins include polypropylene and
polyethylene. Thermoplastic composites have excellent impact
strength. Polyethylene typically is used in packaging and com-
munications equipment, and polypropylene in automotive parts
and appliances.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 31
.How Are Composites Made?
GEL COATS
A special resin called gel coat is a form of polyester or vinyl
ester resin that is used as a coating to protect the laminate from
elements of the weather such as the sun and water, and to pro-
vide a smooth, glossy finish to some composite products. If you
look at the outside of a boat, the smooth, shiny, and sometimes
colorful surface is the gel coat.
Fibers
Fiber reinforcements can be natural or synthetic. Natural fibers
include hemp, flax, and cotton. Most reinforcements used in
composites are synthetic. Common synthetic fibers are glass,
carbon, and aramid. When several layers of reinforcements are
bonded together with resin, they form a laminate. Laminates
are the building blocks of composites.
If you were to use composite materials to replace a traditional camp
gadget—a kitchen rack, for instance—that is made of wood, you could
choose an inexpensive polyester resin. Can you think of other outdoor
gear or useful items (they need not be Scouting-related) that might
perform better or last longer if made of composite materials? Which
resins might do the job best?


32 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
How Are Composites Made?.
GLASS FIBER
Glass fiber is the least expensive of all reinforcements. Glass
fiber (also called fiberglass) is used in more than 90 percent
of manufactured composites. Composites made of polyester
resins and glass fibers are so common, in fact, the term
“fiberglass” is often used for the composite material itself.
Glass fibers, however, are only one part of a composite—they
do the reinforcing.
Glass fibers come in several varieties, designated S-, A-, C-,
or E-glass. Each variety has special characteristics. S-glass is
exceptionally strong. C-glass is extremely resistant to corrosion
and chemical attack. A-glass has good resistance to chemicals.
E-glass does not conduct electricity.
Though economical, glass fiber is relatively heavy. Of the
common synthetic reinforcements, it has the least efficient
strength-to-weight ratio.
CARBON FIBER
Super-strong carbon fiber is extremely stiff, and it is lighter in
weight than glass fiber. Carbon fibers come in several varieties
and strengths and are the most expensive kind of fiber reinforce-
ments. They are typically used to strengthen airplanes and space-
craft. Carbon-reinforced composites are also used in products
such as bicycle frames, tennis rackets, skis, and golf club shafts.
The next time you hear a boat called a “fiberglass
boat,” you will know that is only part of the story. The
glass fibers have been combined with a resin to form
the composite material from which that boat was made.
Carbon fiber bicycle frames like this are popular with cyclists
because of their light weight, strength, and durability.
High-performance
composites that
use superior
fibers like carbon
are referred to
as advanced
composites.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 33
.How Are Composites Made?
ARAMID FIBER
Aramid fiber resists impact. It is used extensively in bulletproof
vests and body armor. Racing drivers wear aramid suits that
help protect them from burns in fiery, high-speed crashes.
Aramid is commonly known by its trademark names, Kevlar®
and Nomex®. In cost, aramid fibers fall between glass and
carbon. Aramid is more difficult to work with than glass and
has a tendency to absorb moisture.
COMBINATIONS AND SPECIAL FIBERS
Different fibers can be combined to make a composite cost less
or perform better. Composites that are made of more than one
fiber are called hybrid composites.
Fibers with special characteristics are used when a
composite must be exceptionally strong or heat-resistant—for
high-performance military aircraft, for instance, or aerospace
applications. These materials are quite expensive. Examples
include boron (an extremely hard natural element) and ceram-
ics (hard, manufactured materials that can withstand high heat
and harsh chemicals).
Synthetic fibers
include glass,
carbon, and
aramid. Glass is
typically white,
carbon fiber is
black, and aramid
is yellow. For more
about fibers, see
the Textile merit
badge pamphlet.
A firefighter’s protective jacket is made of aramid fiber to help
withstand extreme heat. The helmet is made of composite
materials, too.


34 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
How Are Composites Made?.
Fillers and Additives
Fillers are added to resins, not just to replace some resin
and thus reduce a composite’s cost, but often to improve the
finished product in some way. Fillers can improve mechanical
properties—the way a material reacts to fire and smoke, for
instance. Also, filled resins (those with fillers added) will shrink
less than unfilled resins (those without fillers). Parts molded
from filled resins, therefore, will keep their proper shape and
size. Other important properties that fillers provide include stiff-
ness, surface smoothness, and resistance to water, weathering,
and high temperatures or extreme changes in temperature.
Additives and other modifiers expand the usefulness of
resins, aid in the manufacturing process, or make products
more durable. While additives and modifiers often raise the
cost of the basic materials, these substances always improve the
performance of the finished product. Additives are commonly
used in resins to improve fire resistance, to enhance electrical
conductivity (composites are usually nonconductive), and to
add color.
Assembling Fibers
Fiber reinforcements can be used in two ways: chopped
and randomly mixed with resin or bundled together
in patterns.
In most composite products, the fiber reinforcements
are bundled together for strength. Fibers are assembled
in various patterns called fabrics. In the braid pattern, for
example, fibers are woven into a tube shape. A veil is
an ultrathin reinforcement used for smoothness on
the outer surfaces of some composites. Other patterns
include stitched, mat, knit, and unidirectional. For
the Composite Materials merit badge, clothlike
woven reinforcements will be the most common
and simplest to use.
Because each pattern carries loads differently,
how the fibers are placed or assembled is important
to engineers and designers. The cost of each of these
forms also varies, depending on the amount and the
quality of the fiber used.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 35
.How Are Composites Made?
Core Reinforcement
Core materials are widely used in composites to make stiff,
lightweight products. Typical core materials include balsa
(wood from the balsa tree), polyurethane foam and PVC
(polyvinyl chloride) foam (both manufactured in chemical
processes), and honeycomb. These materials are lightweight
and strong.
Using sandwich construction, a core material is placed
between two outside surfaces (called “face skins”) of fiber
reinforcements. This sandwich is bonded together with an
adhesive or glue. The thicker the core, the stiffer the sandwich.
To create a strong, lightweight floor for an aircraft, for example,
engineers select honeycomb with glass-fiber face skins
saturated with a polyester resin. The resulting floor panel
is strong, stiff, and economical.
Honeycomb is a core material made from sheets of resin-soaked
material shaped into cells (openings) like those of a beehive’s
honeycomb. This structural material is strong, lightweight, and
used in sandwich construction.
Many methods are used to manufacture composites.
Selecting the best method depends on several factors,
such as the size of the part to be made, the part’s
shape and surface finish, how many individual parts
will be made, how quickly they will be needed, and
how much money is available to invest in equipment.


36 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
How Are Composites Made?.
Composites Manufacturing Methods
To manufacture a product made of composites, a mold is used
to form the part. The two major divisions of manufacturing
processes are open molding and closed molding.
• In open molding, the raw materials (resin and fibers)
are placed in a mold and allowed to cure (harden) while
exposed to the atmosphere.
• In closed molding, the raw materials are placed in one half
of a two-surface mold. The mold halves are shut and the
materials cure inside the mold, closed to the atmosphere.
Open-Molding Processes
In open molding, the various processes include hand lay-up,
spray-up, casting, and filament winding. Hand lay-up is
the most common and least expensive manufacturing process
because little equipment is needed.
Hand lay-up requires manual labor to mix the resin, satu-
rate the fiber reinforcements, and place the materials in a mold.
This manual method can be used to make products ranging in
size from small to quite large: boats, storage tanks, tubs and
showers, and architectural items such as domes used in build-
ings. It’s a good method when small quantities are needed, and
it is the method used for projects in this merit badge pamphlet.
RESIN
MOLD
RELEASE FILM
GEL COAT
HAND ROLLERFIBERGLASS REINFORCEMENTS
Hand lay-up process


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 37
.How Are Composites Made?
Spray-up is similar to hand lay-
up, but special equipment is
needed. A chopper gun is used to
chop the fiber reinforcements into
small pieces, which are then mixed
in the air with the resin stream
and sprayed on a mold. Spray-up
is more automated than hand
lay-up and is suitable for large
quantities. Many boats and swim-
ming pools are made using the
spray-up method.
Closed-Molding Processes
Closed-molding processes are usually automated, require expen-
sive tools and equipment, and are best suited for manufacturing
plants where large quantities of parts are produced. Typically,
closed molding is for high-volume production ranging from
1,000 to more than 500,000 parts per year.
Closed-molding processes include compression molding,
pultrusion, resin transfer molding, vacuum bag molding,
centrifugal casting, and continuous lamination. The major
differences between these methods (see the glossary) are
how the raw materials are placed in or on the molds
and how they are cured.
Due to the higher
cost of equipment
and tools, the
closed-molding
processes will not
be explored for
this merit badge.
Closed-molding process
MOLD
MOLD
FIBER
REINFORCEMENT
AND RESIN
CHOPPER GUN
MOLD
RESIN ROLLER
Spray-up process


38 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
How Are Composites Made?.
A Manufacturing Example
Suppose you wanted to make a hood for a sports car. The hood
could be made by hand lay-up, spray-up, resin transfer mold-
ing, or compression molding. Which process do you select?
To hand lay-up a hood, start with a mold that is very
smooth. After cleaning and polishing the mold surface, apply a
layer of gel coat. Once the gel coat cures, place fiberglass rein-
forcement in the mold on top of the gel coat. When you have
the correct amount of fiber reinforcement in position, manually
apply polyester resin. Pour the resin on the fiberglass, working
it with brushes, hand rollers, and/or squeegees until all the
fibers are saturated or wet-out. (If you were using the spray-up
method, the fiberglass and the resin would be deposited in the
mold at the same time, using a chopper gun.)
Allow the laminate to cure at room temperature. After the
hood is cured, carefully remove it from the mold and sand
smooth all rough edges. The part then goes through various
operations (drilling holes, adding hardware for hinge attach-
ments and latches) for final assembly on the car. Before you
can use the mold again, you must clean and polish it.
For hand lay-up, the equipment cost is low, but the cost
of labor is high. Producing a single car hood using the hand
lay-up method takes at least three hours.
Using resin transfer molding, the time can be cut to an
hour. This method requires two molds. Gel coat is applied
on one of the molds, then the reinforcement is placed in the
mold, similar to hand lay-up. Once the reinforcement has been
VENTVENT
RESIN AND REINFORCEMENT
MOLD
RESIN INJECTION UNIT
MOLD MOLD
Resin transfer
molding
processes


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 39
.How Are Composites Made?
positioned, hardware can be inserted and the two halves of the
mold are clamped together. Resin is pumped in until the closed
mold is full. The resin is allowed to cure. Then the molds are
separated and the hood is carefully removed. All rough edges
are sanded smooth.
What about compression molding? This method needs no
gel coat or cleaning of the mold surfaces. The two mold halves
are made from high-quality steel, their surfaces treated for long
wear and smoothness. A large, heated press is used to push the
molds together. The composite material is a fiberglass reinforce-
ment that is soaked with resin in a sheet called a prepreg
(short for “preimpregnated,” meaning saturated beforehand).
The material is compressed under high pressure and heat until
the part cures; the heat speeds the curing. A timer on the press
opens the molds exactly when the part has cured. A normal
molding cycle (position the material, cure the part, and unload
it) takes only two minutes. The part requires little finishing
when removed from the press and is ready for final assembly.
Using compression molding, structural features can be molded
into a car hood instead of adding hardware later.
Compression molding can produce parts in large quanti-
ties—hundreds of finished parts each day, compared to only a
few parts per day using the other methods we have considered.
Compression molding, however, is expensive. The labor cost is
low, but the equipment cost is high. The high-quality molds
needed for this method cost almost 50 times as much as a
simple hand lay-up mold.
Visiting a Composites Manufacturer
For requirement 4a, you may choose to visit a company that
makes or repairs composites products. Work with your merit
badge counselor to locate a company in your area and arrange
a visit to or a tour of a manufacturing plant. Search online for
“local fiberglass” listings. You likely will find companies that
design, fabricate, or repair all sorts of fiberglass products, from
tubs and showers to camper toppers, boats, tanks, and pools.
Search for “boat repair,” too, and you will find companies that
specialize in fiberglass.
Which method is
best? If you need
only one or a few
sports-car hoods,
then hand lay-up
is the right
choice. If you are
producing large
quantities of
hoods, then
compression
molding is the
better alternative.


40 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
How Are Composites Made?.
Before the visit or tour, do some homework to find out
what kinds of composite products the company manufactures.
This will help you develop a list of questions to ask. Visiting a
company that manufactures or works with composites is your
chance to cover any questions or concerns that have cropped
up in your work on the Composite Materials merit badge. Here
are sample questions to get you started.
• What manufacturing processes are used (open molding,
closed molding)?
• What molds are used, and how are they used?
• What are the properties of the resins used in the products?
Are the resins thermoplastic or thermoset?
• Are the fiber reinforcements being used natural or synthetic?
What properties of the fibers make them right for the
products being made?
You could also ask about any core materials (balsa,
varieties of foam, honeycomb), fillers or additives, and gel
coats that are used.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 41
.How Are Composites Made?
Before touring a composites manufacturing facility, be sure
to review the “Safety and Environmental Awareness” section
of this pamphlet. Ask about the safety and control measures
the manufacturer uses.
• What hazardous materials does the company use? What
are the safety and environmental concerns associated with
these materials?
• How are hazardous materials handled?
Stored? Disposed of?
• How are work spaces ventilated?
• What protective gear do workers wear?
This worker completes additional graphite/epoxy lay-ups
inside the nitrous tank used in SpaceShipOne.
©2004 Mojave Aerospace Ventures LLC, courtesy; photo by David M. Moore.
SpaceShipOne is a Paul G. Allen Project.





COMPOSITE MATERIALS 43
.Safety and Environmental Awareness
Safety and
Environmental
Awareness
Handling, storing, and disposing of substances used in compos-
ite materials can create safety and environmental hazards. By
taking proper precautions, you can reduce these hazards and
safely use these materials.
Just as you take responsibility for your own safety in
day-to-day tasks, you also must take responsibility for your
safety—and that of others around you—when you work with
composites. Working on projects for this merit badge is similar
to work you have done for other badges involving tools, paints,
and coatings or other chemicals. However, some specific safety
requirements apply when you are using composite materials.
You must be knowledgeable about the materials and tools
you will use for your projects. Be prepared. Understand the
proper methods for safely handling the materials.
As a Scout, you
are probably more
aware of safety
than many other
people are.
Safety is a way
of thinking, a
way of acting,
and a way of
being prepared.Observe two important rules when working
with composites for this merit badge:
• Never work alone. Always work under
qualified adult supervision.
• Work in a well-ventilated outdoor space
that is free of other chemicals and away
from heat sources such as open flames
and electrical equipment that could spark
and cause a fire.


44 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Safety With Chemicals
Before you open a container or begin mixing any chemicals,
make sure you read and understand the instructions and safety
labels on the product. Resins, initiators, solvents, and other
substances have safety information included in their packages.
Carefully study this information—as well as safety data
sheets—before starting to work. A material’s label and SDS
will indicate whether the material is flammable, corrosive,
irritating, or hazardous.
You will use some type of resin, and probably an initiator,
in your composites projects. (Initiators are substances—usually
peroxides—that start the curing of a resin.) Identify these
materials and read the information carefully. If you are not
completely sure of what you have read, seek help before
continuing with your project.
When working with these chemicals, you will almost
certainly spill or drop small amounts. It’s not much different
from pouring paint out of a can into a tray or dipping a paint-
brush into a can; things can get a little messy. The important
point to remember is to always clean up your spills immediately
and dispose of spills and contaminated supplies such as gloves,
protective clothing, and brushes in an approved manner, both
for safety and to protect the environment.
.
Never remove
labels or put
hazardous
materials in
unmarked
containers.
It is required
that you seek
assistance and
guidance from a
responsible adult
who is familiar
with composite
materials before
you start your
project.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 45
.Safety and Environmental Awareness
Safety Data Sheets
Safety data sheets (SDS) give the proper procedures for working
with, handling, and storing materials, and alert the user to any
hazardous substances. The format of the documents may vary,
but by U.S. law all must include certain information presented
in eight specific sections. Some internationally formatted sheets
will have 16 sections.
Here are the eight required sections.
Manufacturer Information. Identifies the material and
lists the manufacturer’s name, address, and emergency
telephone number.
Hazardous Ingredients. Lists the hazardous ingredients
in the material and some of the exposure limits. (See PEL—
permissible exposure limits—in the list of abbreviations
on the following page.)
Physical and Chemical Characteristics. Tells what the
material will look and smell like and what will cause it
to react.
Contact your local
authorities for
information
about disposing
of hazardous
materials and
soiled clothing,
tools, or equipment.
An SDS can be
many pages long.
Be sure to read
the complete
SDS to be fully
informed about
the product you
are using. SDS
information is
available from
the manufacturer
or from public
databases.
Source: Reichhold Inc., Durham, North Carolina


46 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Safety and Environmental Awareness.
Fire and Explosion Hazards. Tells whether the material is
flammable and lists the flash point, firefighting materials and
methods, and any unusual burning characteristics.
Reactivity. Tells how other chemicals will react with the material.
Health Hazards. Lists known routes of entry into the human
body and the health risks from each, and lists any cancer
research that may have been done on the material. Describes
how to recognize and treat overexposure.
Precautions for Safe Handling and Use. Lists procedures to
use in case of accidental spills and gives information about
proper disposal.
Control Measures. Lists ways to avoid making contact with
the material, such as using respirators, wearing gloves, and
working in a well-ventilated area.
Flash point refers
to the temperature
at which vapors
of a material can
ignite if exposed
to a direct ignition
source. The lower
the flash point,
the more highly
flammable a
material is.
SDS Abbreviations
You will often find these important abbreviations in
safety data sheets.
LEL: Lower explosive limit. The lowest concentration
at which the substance will catch fire when an ignition
source is present; below this level, the material
becomes too “lean” (too diluted) to burn.
PEL: Permissible exposure limit. A regulatory limit on
the amount or concentration of the material in the air
that you can safely be exposed to without suffering
undue harm.
UEL: Upper explosive limit. The highest concentration
at which the substance will catch fire when an ignition
source is present; above this level, the material
becomes too “rich” to burn.
TLV: Threshold limit value. Similar to PEL.
TWA: Time-weighted average. The amount of the
material to which the average human can safely be
exposed over an eight-hour workday.
Icons like these often appear on chemical containers. They tell you if a chemical is
corrosive (top), a biohazard (center), or flammable (bottom).


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 47
.Safety and Environmental Awareness
Personal Safety
You can be seriously harmed if you inhale, touch, or swallow
hazardous chemicals or get them in your eyes. When working
with composites, take precautions against exposure to chemicals
and wear the appropriate personal protective equipment.
AVOID INHALATION
Avoid breathing vapors. Always work in a well-ventilated
outdoor area. Avoid using household fans to provide better
ventilation, because electricity in the presence of flammable
solvents such as acetone can cause an explosion and fire.
Wear a respirator if the manufacturer recommends one.
The SDS or other information about the materials you are using
will indicate whether a respirator is required. Generally, if you
are working in a well-ventilated area, you will not need a
respirator. If you are sanding or creating dust, you may choose
to wear a dust mask similar to what drywall installers use.
Hazardous materials are capable of causing death or
serious harm. Fiber reinforcements are nontoxic, but
they can irritate your skin. Resins, initiators, and solvents,
however, can be highly hazardous. Breathing high concen-
trations of their vapors can affect your health. Skin and eye
contact from some chemicals can cause burns and tissue damage. These
substances may be fatal if swallowed. Read and follow label precautions,
carefully review the SDS, and know the proper first-aid measures.


48 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Safety and Environmental Awareness.
AVOID SKIN CONTACT
Always wear gloves when
mixing chemicals and
handling reinforcements.
Gloves are made of various
materials. Latex and vinyl
are common. Different
gloves may be required,
depending on the resin
used and the type of
cleanup solvents. The
SDS will specify the
type of gloves to be
worn. If you do not
have the SDS, check the
product label—it might describe the
appropriate type of gloves to use.
To protect your skin from resins and solvents, wear
nonabsorbent protective clothing. Ensure that all areas of
exposed skin are covered, including wearing gloves to protect
your hands. A special type of disposable work clothes made
from fabrics like Tyvek® are used to keep industrial workers
safe from contact with chemicals. These clothes can be
obtained from composites industry manufacturing equipment
suppliers or in some specialty hardware or paint stores. Booties
also can be used to cover and protect shoes from dripping
resin. Do not use plastic bags or throwaway rain gear to cover
your clothing, because solvents will degrade the material.
If you do not wear
foot coverings
while working
with composite
materials, be sure
to wear sturdy old
shoes that you
(and your parent)
do not mind ruining
with dripped resin.
Before starting your projects, discuss and
plan how you will respond to emergen-
cies. You must have an emergency plan.
Begin by knowing and understanding the
materials you will use. Ask yourself how
and where something could go wrong, and plan your
action to correct it. Have a fire extinguisher and/or
other firefighting tools handy, as directed in the SDS. If
you are using electric tools, know where the power
shutoff switches are. Identify the exits in advance, in
case you need to get out of your work area quickly.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 49
.Safety and Environmental Awareness
AVOID EYE CONTACT
Always wear safety glasses or goggles when working
on your composites projects. Take special care not to splash
chemicals on your face or get them in your eyes.
AVOID INGESTION
Thoroughly wash your hands before handling food, eating,
or drinking. Keep chemicals completely away from dining areas
or anywhere food is prepared or eaten.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk
and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just
about any incident that might happen while working
with composite materials.


50 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Safety and Environmental Awareness.
Handling Reinforcements
Glass-fiber reinforcements can cause your skin to itch. The
protection used for handling reinforcements should be the same
as used for handling resins and other chemicals. It is important
to wear protective clothing, gloves, and goggles. Here are some
other tips for handling reinforcements.
• Wash your work clothes separately from other laundry to
avoid contaminating other clothes with fiber particles.
• If fibers irritate your skin, wash with mild soap and running
water to relieve itching and redness. Wash hands thoroughly
before eating or drinking.
• If you get fibers in your eyes, flush them gently but thoroughly
with plenty of plain water. Seek medical attention.
Fire Safety
Just as you must be careful when you refuel a power
mower, you must take care when handling chemicals
for making composites.
HANDLING FLAMMABLE MATERIALS
The chemicals used in making composites can react with
various materials, and if spilled, dropped, or leaked they
must be cleaned up immediately to avoid accidents and
prevent a fire hazard. When handling flammable solvents
or other flammable materials, take these special precautions.
• Avoid open flames, sparks, and static discharges. Do not
allow smoking in an area where resins or other flammable
materials are used or stored.
• Avoid contact with electrical equipment or devices such as
fans and extension cords.
• Keep flammable solvents and rags that are saturated with
solvent in closed metal safety containers.
• If they are five gallons or larger, electrically ground metal
containers when transferring material between them.
As you know from your Scouting activities, fires cannot
occur without three things present: fuel, oxygen, and
heat. Without any one of these elements, a fire cannot
start or be sustained.
You may dispose
of fiberglass
scraps in ordinary
household trash.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 51
.Safety and Environmental Awareness
SAFELY CURING RESINS
If your project uses polyester resin, you will add an
initiator to the resin to cure it. This will cause the mix
to generate heat—one of the requirements for fire.
The heat generated is a normal reaction but potentially
hazardous. The materials must be handled safely. In
your work area, follow these simple guidelines.
• Do not allow smoking or open flames.
• Use only equipment rated for use with flammable materials.
• Maintain your equipment in good condition.
• Clean up spills immediately.
• Properly dispose of excess curing resin. Initiate the resin with
the proper amount of peroxide. (Follow the manufacturer’s
instructions.) Then fill the container with water and place it
in a safe outside area, away from ignition sources, until the
mixture cools to room temperature. Permit excess resin and
scrap material to fully cure and cool before disposing of them.
• Use only the proper amount of initiator with the resin.
Special precautions are needed for handling initiators.
Follow the manufacturer’s instructions. In general:
• Avoid spills, because spontaneous combustion (self-ignition
through chemical reactions) can occur when initiators
combine with certain materials.
• Avoid contact with metal.
• Avoid splashing to prevent possible
chemical burns to skin.
• Avoid direct sunlight
and other sources
of heat.
Initiator
When large quantities of resin are mixed, smoking “hot
pots” can occur. The curing resin generates so much
heat that it makes smoke. This is both a fire hazard and
a health hazard. Take care not to breathe the smoke or
fumes. Avoid this situation by mixing only the quantity
of resin you need.


52 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Safety and Environmental Awareness.
Environmental Responsibility
When working with composite materials and related chemicals
and substances, you must take care at every step to avoid
contaminating the air, water, or soil. Without proper disposal,
materials like resins, initiators, and solvents can cause problems.
You must follow SDS instructions, as well as state and
federal regulations, when disposing of any materials used in
making composites. Local, state, and federal regulations apply
to hazardous material disposal, so ask your merit badge
counselor about regulations that may affect your work on your
composites projects. The local Environmental Protection Agency
office (search online for “EPA” or “local EPA”) can tell you
about environmental regulations in your area.
Material Storage and Disposal
Because manufacturers in the composites industry handle
large quantities of chemicals, the plants have designated areas
and use special fireproof storage cabinets and containers for
storing chemicals.
Unused leftover fiberglass cloth can be disposed of in
household trash. Before disposing of mixed resin, allow the
resin to fully cure, cool down, and become solid. Dispose of in
a separate bag. You may then throw it away like ordinary trash.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 53
.Safety and Environmental Awareness
Unmixed resin, hardener, or other liquid chemicals
are considered hazardous waste. If the SDS does
not offer specific advice on disposal, ask the local
waste-hauling authority for the proper procedure for
disposing of small quantities of hazardous materials.
Dispose of any chemical material according to the
manufacturer’s instructions and local laws. Many
counties have hazardous waste stations or depots
where these materials can be taken.
For small projects and work areas, where you are not
likely to have these special cabinets and containers,
follow these general guidelines for material storage
and disposal.
• Keep bottles and tubes of resin, epoxy, and other
materials tightly capped.
• Do not store materials for long periods. See the
manufacturer’s instructions.
• Do not dispose of initiators in normal
household waste.
• Make sure all resins and scrap composites are
fully cured and cooled down before disposing
of them. Once the materials are fully cured and
have become solid, they may be disposed of
with the household trash.
• Properly dispose of materials according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Be sure to contact
your city or other authority for any special instruc-
tions about disposal.





COMPOSITE MATERIALS 55
.Your Composites Projects
Your Composites Projects
For requirement 5, you will make two projects using composite
materials. A project can involve laminating onto a core material,
the same technique that is used for creating surfboards, skate-
boards, and snowboards. Or you might use a mold to form
your project—creating a small boat using an existing toy as
your mold, for example.
Composites
lamination works
best in warmer
temperatures.
Preparing Your Project Area
Select a well-ventilated work area outside—a concrete
driveway is a good space. Remember to spread
newspaper on the working surface for easy cleanup.
When you are ready to begin using the resin and other
chemicals, remember to put on your protective gear
and clothing (such as a Tyvek® uniform). These items
will keep solvents and other chemicals off your
clothes and skin.


56 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Your Composites Projects.
Basics of Hand Lay-Up Laminating
As you have read, composites products can be manufactured
in several different ways depending on the size of the part,
the quantity to be made, and the final cost of the product.
In the composites industry, nothing is more basic than hand
lay-up lamination. In making your projects, you will use the
hand lay-up process. The other manufacturing methods are
simply too costly and are geared more toward large-scale
commercial production.
In your work for this merit badge, you will use fiberglass
reinforcement and resins, most likely polyester or epoxy. These
materials are readily available. You can buy them at specialty
stores such as boat repair shops, auto repair or parts stores,
large hardware stores, or hobby shops.
Steps in Hand Lay-Up
You can use hand lay-up to make a part in a mold or to
make a sandwich construction using a core material that
acts as the mold. The following explanation assumes that
you will make a part in (or on) a mold that has the shape
of the final product. The laminating process includes
these steps:
Step 1—Prepare the mold.
Step 2—Mix the resin.
Step 3—Place and distribute the saturated fiberglass
reinforcement on the mold.
Step 4—Saturate (wet-out) the reinforcement with the
right amount of resin to achieve the proper resin-to-
reinforcement ratio. Add resin as necessary to any
dry spots.
Step 5—Remove trapped air and compact the laminate.
Step 6—Allow the laminate to cure completely.
As you learn and practice the basic techniques of lamination, you and
your buddies should work with a responsible adult who is experienced in
handling resin and the other materials used in composites manufacturing.
The simple explanation provided in this pamphlet is meant only as an
introduction to the process. It is not a substitute for the hands-on demon-
stration and supervision given by someone familiar with the materials
and techniques.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 57
.Your Composites Projects
Tools for Laminating
For hand lay-up laminating, you need two basic tools:
• Squeegee—to spread resin and to compact
the laminate. As you pour resin
onto the fiberglass rein-
forcement, you use a
curving or S-shaped
motion of the squeegee
with just enough pressure
to make a good laminate
surface that has the correct
ratio of resin to reinforcement.
• Stiff brush—to work resin into
the reinforcement and to remove
excess resin.
PREPARING THE MOLD
The mold must be clean and smooth. To be sure the part
you make will come out of the mold, first apply a wax coating
to the mold surface. The easiest way to do this is to apply
carnauba furniture wax to the surface and pretend you are
waxing your parent’s car. Once you have coated the mold,
you are ready to begin.
MIXING THE RESIN
Carefully read the instructions on the container of the resin you
are using. Properly mixing the resin and the initiator (hardener)
is key to good work. Each resin uses ingredients that are specif-
ically made for that product.
Follow the manufacturer’s instructions and do not mix
and match ingredients. Determine the amount of resin you need,
and pour it into a suitable container for mixing. Measure the
correct amount of initiator in a polyethylene or polypropylene
measuring cup—not a metal container. Pour the initiator into
the resin and mix thoroughly.
The temperature outside will affect the amount of initiator
that will be required. Use less initiator in hot weather and more
in cold weather, but read the instructions first so you do not
use more or less than the indicated range. Using too much or
too little initiator will cause the laminate to cure improperly.
If you are making a sandwich
construction, omit the
mold-preparation step.
If your mold has
a slope, it’s best
to wet-out the
reinforcement
before you put
it in the mold.


58 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Your Composites Projects.
PLACING THE REINFORCEMENT
One way to place the reinforcement is
to pull an ample piece of the fiberglass
material directly from the roll or package,
lay it into the mold, and trim it to shape
using hand shears or heavy-duty scissors.
You will need to cut the outside edges,
corners, pleats, and other shapes
necessary to make the fiberglass
conform to the shape of the mold.
A second method is to
cut a pattern. You precut the
material to a specific shape,
then place it in the mold. Cutting
a pattern has advantages: You save
time during laminating and avoid
trimming the material in the mold.
SATURATING THE FIBERGLASS REINFORCEMENT
A good laminate has no dry spots on the reinforcement.
The individual glass fibers are thoroughly saturated—wet-out—
with resin.
How much time and effort it takes to completely wet-out a
laminate depends on several factors, including the type of resin,
the temperature, and the type of fiber reinforcement.
The resin-to-glass ratio is simply the amount of resin in the
laminate compared to the amount of fiberglass. This is usually
determined by the weights of the resin and the glass. The proper
amount of resin is important for a quality product. Too much
resin gives a resin-rich result. Too little, and your final product
is resin-starved.
• If resin-rich, the product will be weak and too heavy, and
will look sloppy. A resin-rich surface appears glossy or wet,
and individual fibers cannot be seen.
• If resin-starved, the product will also be weak and look
sloppy, and it will not cure properly. A resin-starved surface
appears whitish with transparent, air-filled areas.
You can determine the resin-to-glass ratio by looking.
A laminate with the proper amount of resin should have a
dull surface appearance with a distinct fiber pattern showing.
Make sure to mix
only enough resin
to finish the
project. Mixing
too little resin will
stop your lay-up
process and
damage your
project, but mixing
too much could
result in a
smoking hot pot.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 59
.Your Composites Projects
REMOVING AIR BUBBLES AND
COMPACTING THE LAMINATE
When you saturate the fiberglass reinforcement with resin,
air can be trapped in the laminate, creating voids. Air voids are
simply bubbles, which when trapped in the cured laminate can
cause problems ranging from poor appearance to structural
failure. To remove air bubbles, use a squeegee or a paint roller
to push the saturated glass reinforcement evenly down to the
mold surface, squeezing air voids out of the laminate.
CURING THE LAMINATE
Temperature is important in properly curing resins. The warmer
the weather, the faster the resin will cure. Polyester and particu-
larly vinyl ester resins do not cure well at low temperatures. The
minimum temperature for laminating, therefore, is 60 degrees.
Check the manufacturer’s instructions and be sure you are work-
ing within the recommended temperature range at all times.
The mixture’s thickness also affects cure time. Thinner
laminates cure more slowly and thicker ones cure more quickly.
Making Overlaps and Seams
In large composites projects, several pieces of fiberglass
reinforcement might be necessary to cover the surface.
When you join pieces of fiberglass reinforcement
to form a seam, overlap the pieces by 1 to 3 inches.
This ensures that the structural properties of the lami-
nate are not weakened. If you use more than one layer
of reinforcement, be sure to stagger or space out the
overlaps to avoid thick buildups that also can create
weak areas.
Resin curing too quickly? In hot weather, you may
find that the “pot life” or working time of the resin
you are using is too short. The speed of curing may
be slowed with a different mix of resin ingredients.
Follow the manufacturer’s instructions or ask your
counselor’s advice.
Remember that
your projects for
this merit badge
must be completed
under the direct
supervision of
your merit
badge counselor
or another
responsible
adult who is
knowledgeable
about composites.


60 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Your Composites Projects.
FINISHING
Once the resin has cured, you can remove the part or product
from the mold. Take care not to damage the product or the
mold. Use heavy-duty scissors (or a small saw if necessary)
to remove excess resin and fiberglass from the product’s edges.
Clean the edges with sandpaper or a file. If the mold was not
smooth, the product’s surface may be rough. Lightly sandpaper
the surface smooth. Finish with paint, if desired.
Project Ideas
Now that you are familiar with the basics of hand lay-up, you
can proceed with your own projects. Here are some ideas.
Model Airplane
This project is a composite of polystyrene foam, paper, and glue.
Step 1—Assemble the model airplane according to the manu-
facturer’s instructions.
Step 2—Apply a light coat of white glue to a small spot on the
surface of the model.
Step 3—Apply tissue paper or lightweight wrapping paper to
the model, making sure to saturate (wet-out) all areas with the
glue. If needed, apply more glue until the paper is thoroughly
saturated. Try to avoid wrinkles in the paper.
Step 4—Work out any air bubbles by pushing the glue toward
the edge of the paper using the paintbrush or ice-cream stick.
Materials
Polystyrene foam glider kit (available from a craft store)
Tissue paper or lightweight wrapping paper, nonwaxed,
not coated
White glue
Small paintbrush
Ice-cream sticks (5)
Sandpaper
Paint and brushes to decorate the finished piece
Newspaper to protect work surface
Water for cleanup
Prevent the glue
from drying
before the paper
is applied by
working only in
small areas.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 61
.Your Composites Projects
Step 5—Wipe or squeegee off excess glue using the straight
edge of an ice-cream stick.
Step 6—Repeat steps 2 through 5 on all exposed surfaces of
the model so that no polystyrene foam is exposed. Allow the
model to dry overnight.
Step 7—Lightly sand the model with sandpaper to prepare the
surface for painting, then paint it as you like.
1 2
3 4


62 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Your Composites Projects.
Decorative Birdhouse
This project is a composite of glass-fiber reinforcement, polyes-
ter resin, and cardboard (core material). Optional core material
could be balsa wood or urethane foam (not polystyrene foam).
Materials
Fiberglass repair kit that includes polyester resin,
fiberglass cloth or mat, and initiator (available
at auto supply stores or in the hardware
section of some stores)
Cardboard from an old box
Paper-based tape
Newspaper
Goggles, disposable dust mask, and properly fitting
latex gloves for protection
Disposable mixing cup or bowl (16-ounce) to mix resin
Ice-cream sticks or tongue depressors
Small paintbrush (no more than 1⁄2 inch wide) to spread
the resin
Acetone
Sandpaper (medium and fine grit)
Paint and paintbrush to decorate the finished piece
Heavy-duty scissors
Utility knife
Ruler/straight edge
Cutting board
Always read
manufacturers’
instructions
and precautions
before working
with resins,
initiators, or
other chemicals.


.Your Composites Projects
Template for cardboard walls, floor, and roof, to be enlarged.
The fiberglass mat should be 1 inch wider than the cardboard.
FIBERGLASS EDGE
LEFT SIDE FRONT RIGHT SIDE BACK
TOP
CUT OFF CORNERS
9.25"
6.75"
6.75" 6.75" 6.75" 6.75"
9.25"
8.75" 7.5"
1"
6.75"
6.75"
BOTTOM
COMPOSITE MATERIALS 63


64 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Your Composites Projects.
Step 1—Using scissors or a utility knife, cut out cardboard
shapes to form the walls and roof of the birdhouse.
Step 2—Mark a 2-inch hole in the cardboard front wall as if for
bird entry. Cut out the hole with a utility knife.
Step 3—Temporarily assemble house panels with paper tape.
Before proceeding, examine the structure and make sure the
house is what you want. Now is the time to make changes.
Once the lamination process starts, it is too late.
3
2


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 65
.Your Composites Projects
Step 4—Cut the fiberglass mat for the walls and roof as shown
in the pattern. There will be about 1 inch of overlap around the
edges of the birdhouse.
Start Lamination
Step 1—Wearing latex gloves and eye protection, measure
12 ounces of resin into the disposable mixing cup. Then consult
the manufacturer’s instructions to determine how much initiator
to add to the resin you have poured into the cup.
When mixing resin
or laminating,
wear latex gloves
and goggles.
Be careful not to
spill or splash resin.
Immediately clean up any spills. Use caution when
weighing resin and initiator. Always add initiator to
resin, not the other way around.


66 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Your Composites Projects.
Step 2—Use an ice-cream stick or tongue depressor to
thoroughly stir the resin and initiator mixture.
Step 3—Using the paintbrush, lightly coat the outside of the
walls with resin.
Once the initiator
is added to the
resin and you
have mixed it well,
you are working
against the clock.
The resin will
begin to harden
immediately, so
you will need to
work quickly and
precisely. The
“working time” is
the period of time
the resin can be
manipulated
before it hardens.
2
3


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 67
.Your Composites Projects
Step 4—Carefully place the fiberglass mat on top of the resin,
being careful to leave a 1-inch overlap around all the sides.
Cut the entry hole out of the fiberglass.
Step 5—Using the paintbrush, wet-out (saturate with resin) the
fiberglass mat to the edges of the birdhouse walls. Remove air
bubbles or wrinkles in the mat by applying pressure to the sur-
face with the brush. Use sweeping motions from the center of
the piece to the edges. If there are any dry spots, pour a small
amount of additional resin onto the mat and work it in with the
paintbrush. All areas of the fiberglass mat must be wet-out, but
avoid using too much resin.
Step 6—Mix a smaller batch of resin as described in steps 1
and 2, and wet-out the overlaps on the fiberglass mat. Fold the
flaps to the inside of the walls.
Step 7—Fold the walls of the birdhouse into shape, overlap-
ping the fiberglass mat at the seam. Set the house aside in a
well-ventilated outside area, and allow it to cure.
Step 8—While the birdhouse is curing, repeat the laminating
process (steps 1 through 7) with the roof and the floor. Allow
these to cure also.
Step 9—Attach the roof and floor to the house. The roof
may be permanently attached or removable to make it easier
to paint.
5


68 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Finish
Step 1—Clean the tools you
used with acetone.
Step 2—Allow all unused,
initiated resin to harden.
Step 3—Properly dispose of
used brushes, newspaper, and
any hardened resin after it
has cooled.
Step 4—Lightly sand the out-
side surface of the birdhouse to
remove excess resin and rough
edges. Paint as desired.
Decorative Molded Bowl
For a project using a
mold, make a simple
decorative bowl.
You could use a
fiberglass repair
kit for boats that
includes resin, initi-
ator (hardener), fiber-
glass cloth, plastic spreader
or squeegee, mixing stick,
mixing tray, and instructions
for use. To keep the
composite from sticking to
the bowl (or other mold
you use), first cover the
mold with a suitable
mold release. This might
be wax, waxed paper, a
Mylar sheet, or another
material. Be sure to use a
mold release that will work
well with the resin system you
are using and will not harm the mold. If you are not sure what
mold release to use, read the instructions that came with the
fiberglass repair kit and ask your counselor’s advice.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 69
.Your Composites Projects
Evaluating the Finished Projects
For requirement 5c, you are to evaluate (judge) your completed
projects with your counselor. What features or qualities do you
think your finished projects should have? Do your projects meet
your expectations for such qualities as those listed here? (You
may use this list as a starting point for discussion, but tailor
your evaluation to your own projects and to your personal goals
and expectations.)
Are your finished products
• Useful and safe to use or display?
• Structurally sound and impact-resistant?
• Attractive and free of air voids?
• Not resin-rich or resin-starved?
• Well-proportioned, balanced, symmetrical, and even?
• Strong, stiff, and durable?
• Lightweight or buoyant (capable of floating)?
• Waterproof or weathertight?
• Rustproof?
• Not flammable?
• Nonconductive?
Did you have any construction or safety problems? How
would you avoid them in the future?
Project Ideas
Lots of fun and useful items can be made or repaired using the materials
and techniques described in this chapter. Use your imagination to dream
up something that strikes your fancy, but always follow all the safety pre-
cautions described in this pamphlet and specified by the manufacturers for
the products that you use. Be sure you have your merit badge counselor’s
approval before you begin, and work with a responsible adult who is
knowledgeable about composites. Here are a few possibilities for
composites projects.
• Walking stick • Repair or reinforce a wooden tool handle
• Model boat • Patrol kitchen box
• Skateboard • Camp signage
• Snowshoes • Fire bucket


©2004 Mojave Aerospace Ventures LLC, courtesy; photograph
by David M. Moore. SpaceShipOne is a Paul G. Allen Project.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 71
Careers in the
Composites Industry
The composites industry offers many career opportunities.
You might find a position with a company that produces the
raw materials used in manufacturing composites, or a company
that makes composite parts, or one that uses the parts. You
might work at a university or in a laboratory doing research and
development on new materials or processes. You might work
in design, creating new applications for composite materials.
A high school graduate may qualify for a manufacturing
position in a composites plant as a material technician, mold
operator, toolmaker, painter, or general laborer, for example.
Further education or training is necessary, however, for most
opportunities in the composites industry.
Educational requirements beyond high school depend on
the career path you choose. Some positions require a two-year
technical or associate degree; others require a four-year bachelor’s
degree. For advanced positions, you might need a master’s degree
or doctorate. Chemistry and engineering are common majors.
Types of Career Opportunities
In composites-related industries you will find five major areas of
career opportunities: research and development, production, mar-
keting and sales, human relations, and finance. Some positions
require degrees in business, accounting, finance, or marketing.
In office positions, it is common to find people who have both
engineering and business degrees.
Here are some typical professions in the composites industry.
Chemists
Chemists develop formulas for the resins that go into various com-
posites. Their work may take much time and many experiments.
A chemist may work in a research laboratory, in a quality control
.
©2004 Mojave Aerospace
Ventures LLC, courtesy;
photograph by David M.
Moore. SpaceShipOne is a
Paul G. Allen Project.
Wherever your
career path may
lead, it starts with
a high school
diploma and a
good foundation in
science and math.
Opt for all of the
general science,
math, chemistry,
physics, and
English classes
that you can.


72 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Careers in the Composites Industry.
department, or on the manufacturing “floor” (which is the area of
a plant or factory where products are actually made, as opposed to
the offices or labs). This is a problem-solving, inventive career.
A chemist may solve problems in manufacturing, or—as a techni-
cal sales or service person—may help customers solve problems.
Chemists usually have at least a bachelor’s degree in
chemistry. Master’s degrees and doctorates are common.
Chemical Engineer
While chemists concentrate on resin formulas and processes,
chemical engineers are mainly builders who draw on their
chemical knowledge to design and plan facilities to manufac-
ture resins, reinforcements, or composite products. In other
words, chemical engineers use the basic knowledge developed
by chemists to set up ways to apply composites technology to
make materials and products.
To earn a bachelor’s degree in chemical engineering,
people study not only chemistry but also physical design,
economics, and manufacturing. Many chemical
engineers hold master’s degrees.
Chemical Technician
Chemical technicians work for and with chemists
and chemical engineers to develop new products,
resin formulas, and new or improved processes
to achieve specific purposes. They test resins and
composites, set up equipment, conduct experi-
ments, and install and operate machinery to
make resins or composite products. Technicians
work in manufacturing plants, research labs, and
chemical production facilities.
This type of position requires knowledge of labora-
tory methods, test procedures, and using instruments. A
technician often has two years of college chemistry or engi-
neering and holds an associate degree.
Product Designer
Product designers find good ways to use composites for new pur-
poses. They look at new and inventive ways to use composites to
replace conventional materials such as glass, steel, concrete, and
wood. They create products that look good, are strong, and have
the desired physical characteristics.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 73
.Careers in the Composites Industry
A product designer needs a background in materials
engineering, composites, structural engineering, and
design, and needs to have an artistic flair. This posi-
tion requires at least a bachelor’s degree, typically
in engineering.
Materials Engineer
Materials engineers must understand composites
and how they perform and the advantages of
composites over other materials. In some ways a
materials engineer is much like a product designer
who not only designs but also builds the compos-
ite. These professionals are becoming more important
to the industry as composites are being used in new
ways and new places. Some universities now offer bache-
lor’s degrees in composite materials engineering.
Manufacturing or Production Engineer
A manufacturing engineer is well-trained in all manufacturing
techniques. This person is responsible for taking the design and
making sure it is built correctly. A manufacturing engineer must
be a problem solver to make sure the production line is always
moving. This person works with all production departments.
Quality Engineer
A quality engineer makes sure the parts and products are
built as specified in the design. This engineer is well-trained
in testing and inspection and often deals with customers.
• Production supervisor
• Pattern or tool maker
• Laminator
• Mold fabricator
• Press/mold setup technician
• Assembler
• Fixture, jig, or rigging fabricator
• Fluid-handling setup and
maintenance worker
• Woodworker, metalworker,
or electrician
Other Composites Manufacturing Positions
Many positions in composites manufacturing require a specialized skill
or knowledge, including


74 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Glossary.
Glossary
additive. A material added to a resin to enhance its performance.
Additives include colorants and flame retardants.
advanced composite. A composite that is applied in high-
performance applications, such as aircraft or military applications.
anisotropic. Materials having different strengths or properties in
different directions; a quality of composites.
aramid fiber. A synthetic reinforcing fiber used in body-armor
fabric, fire-resistant clothing, and other applications; short for
aromatic polyamide, commonly called Kevlar® and Nomex®.
carbon fiber. A high-performance, synthetic reinforcing fiber
known for its light weight, high strength, and high stiffness. It is
produced by “baking” or “charring” rayon, pitch, or acrylic fibers
at temperatures above 1,800 degrees Fahrenheit.
casting. A mixture of resin and fillers poured into a mold,
usually without fiber reinforcement, and left to cure to form
the final product.
closed-mold process. Manufacturing process where reinforcements
and resins are closed to the atmosphere and processed in a two-
sided mold or within a vacuum bag.
composite, or composite material. A material that is made up of
two or more different materials that, when combined, are stronger
than the individual materials; generally referred to as composites.
compression molding. A closed-mold manufacturing process
in which composite materials are compressed between matched
molds under high pressure and heat until the part cures. Used for
molding large quantities of complex parts.
compressive strength. The ability of a material to resist a
crushing or buckling force.
conductive. Capable of transferring electrical current.
crosslinking. The chemical bond that turns liquid resin into a
solid material.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 75
.Glossary
curing. The chemical process that converts a resin into a
hardened state.
epoxy resin. A thermoset resin having excellent strength,
adhesion, and corrosion protection.
exothermic. The quality of resin to give off heat when it cures.
fabric. Arrangement of fibers held together in two dimensions.
fiber. Slender, threadlike material that is much longer than it is
round and is an individual strand in a fabric.
fiber-reinforced polymer (FRP) composite. Material in which a
polymer resin contains reinforcing fibers providing greater strength
and stiffness than either the resin or fiber alone. FRP composite is a
more specific term than the general word, “composites.” Sometimes
referred to as advanced composites.
filament. A single element in a fiber; the smallest unit of a
fibrous material.
filament winding. An open-mold manufacturing process that
applies resin-saturated, continuous strands of fiber reinforcements
over a rotating cylindrical mold; used for creating hollow products
like rocket motor casings, pipes, and chemical storage tanks.
filler. A material added to resins to improve the appearance and
performance of composites and lower the cost.
gel coat. The outermost surface layer of resin; a special polymer
resin that enhances the surface appearance and performance
of composites.
glass fiber. A fiber made from molten glass (silica, sand, limestone,
and other minor ingredients), available in several types such as
A-glass, E-glass, S-glass, and C-glass. Also called fiberglass.
hand lay-up. An open-mold manufacturing process in which a
reinforcement is applied to the mold by hand and resin is applied
with a brush or roller onto the reinforcement.
hardener. A chemical added to a thermoset resin to cause a
curing reaction.
honeycomb. A manufactured core material of resin-saturated
sheet material formed into six-sided cells or openings and used
in sandwich construction.
hybrid composites. A composite laminate of two or more
different fiber reinforcements, such as glass and carbon fiber,
combined in a single structure.


76 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Glossary.
impact strength. The ability of a material to resist an abrupt or
shock load.
initiator. A hardener, sometimes called a catalyst, that causes the
cure of a thermoset resin.
isotropic. Having uniform properties in all directions; a quality
of metal.
laminate. Two or more layers of fiber reinforcement bonded
together with a resin.
mil. A unit of measurement that defines the diameter of glass
fibers (1 mil = 0.001 inch or 0.0254 millimeter).
mold. A tool for forming composite materials into the desired
shapes or parts.
monomer. A single molecule that is a constituent of a polymer.
nonconductive. Incapable of transferring electrical current.
open-mold process. Manufacturing process where reinforcements
and resins are exposed to the atmosphere.
ply. A term used to describe a single layer of reinforcement
in composites.
polymer. A large molecule made up of many monomer units
that are linked together in a chain. Polymers can be naturally
occurring, such as starch, or synthetic, such as polyester.
prepreg. A reinforcement that is saturated with resin and ready
to use for molding; short for “preimpregnated,” meaning the fibers
have been presoaked with resin.
pultrusion. A closed-mold manufacturing process to form
composites into long, consistent shapes like rods or bars.
Continuous strands of reinforcement are pulled through a resin
bath to saturate them, then pulled through heated steel molds
that shape the composites into continuous lengths. Pultruded
products include fishing rods and golf club shafts.
reinforcement. A term for fibers, particles, or “whiskers”
(thin hairlike materials) used in composites. Fibers are the
most common reinforcement in composites and greatly
influence composites’ properties.
resin. A polymer (plastic) that binds together reinforcing material
in a composite.
resin transfer molding. A closed-mold manufacturing process
in which reinforcement material is placed in a closed mold, into
which resin is injected under pressure.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 77
.Glossary
roving. A loose bundle of untwisted yarns or strands of a
reinforcing material.
safety data sheet (SDS). A document that includes detailed
information on a material, including health and physical hazards,
exposure limits, and precautions.
sandwich construction. Two relatively thin laminate sheets
(“face skins”) bonded to a lightweight core material such as
honeycomb, balsa, or varieties of foam.
solvent. A liquid substance capable of dissolving or dispersing
other substances. In working with polymer resins, solvents such
as acetone are commonly used for cleanup.
spray-up. An open-mold manufacturing process in which a
chopper gun is used to chop reinforcement material and add
it to resin, which is then sprayed onto a mold. This process is
used in boat manufacturing.
storage life. The period of time during which a liquid resin,
initiator, or other chemical can be stored under specified
temperatures and remain suitable for use. Also called shelf life.
strand. A bundle of filaments, normally untwisted.
tensile strength. The ability of a material to resist forces that
stretch the material.
thermoplastic resins. Resins that are not crosslinked and so
can be melted, formed, remelted, and re-formed.
thermoset resins. Resins that are converted from a liquid to a
solid through irreversible crosslinking.
vacuum bag molding. A closed-mold manufacturing process
in which a vacuum is created to force the laminate against a
mold, thus removing trapped air and excess resin and compacting
the laminate.
vinyl ester. A type of thermoset resin related to epoxy resin and
commonly used in corrosion protection.
wet-out. The process of thoroughly saturating reinforcements
with resin.
yarn. A twisted bundle of continuous filaments, fibers, or strands,
used for weaving fabric reinforcements.


78 COMPOSITE MATERIALS
Composite Materials Resources.
Composite Materials Resources
Scouting Literature
Chemistry, Engineering, Inventing, Model
Design and Building, Robotics, Space
Exploration, and Textile merit badge
pamphlets
Books
Marshall, Andrew C. Composite Basics,
7th ed. Marshall Consulting
Publishing, 2005.
Rutan, Burt. Moldless Composite
Sandwich Aircraft Construction.
Rutan Aircraft, 2005.
Strong, A. Brent. Fundamentals of
Composites Manufacturing: Materials,
Methods, and Applications. Society
of Manufacturing Engineers, 2007.
Periodicals
Composites Manufacturing
American Composites Manufacturers
Association
Telephone: 703-525-0511
compositesmanufacturingmagazine.com
Composites Technology
Gardner Publications Inc.
Telephone: 513-527-8800
www.compositesworld.com
The Boy Scouts of America gives special
thanks to the American Composites
Manufacturers Association for its assistance
with the development and production of the
Composite Materials merit badge pamphlet.
For more information about composites, visit ACMA at www.acmanet.org.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


COMPOSITE MATERIALS 79
.Composite Materials Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Composites Manufacturers
Association
www.acmanet.org
American Society for Composites
Department of Civil and Environmental
Engineering and Engineering Mechanics
University of Dayton
www.asc-composites.org
Center for Composite Materials
University of Delaware
Telephone: 302-831-8149
www.ccm.udel.edu
Occupational Safety and Health
Administration
Toll-free telephone: 800-321-6742
www.osha.gov/composites
SDS Online
www.ilpi.com/msds
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is extremely
grateful to the M.C. Gill Corporation,
El Monte, California, for its generous
gift to fund the development and pro-
duction of this new Composite Materials
merit badge and pamphlet. The M.C.
Gill Corporation is a composites indus-
try leader around the globe.
Thanks to the many individuals
and groups involved with the develop-
ment and production of the merit badge
and pamphlet. In particular, thanks to
the following: Merwyn C. “M.C.” Gill,
Stephen Gill, Matt Lowry, and Armond
Beal, M.C. Gill Corporation; Phil Gill,
Royal Plastic; John P. Busel, Larry Cox,
Robert Lacovara, Andy Rusnak, and
Missy Henriksen (former executive
director), American Composites
Manufacturers Association; Denny Fink,
Jim Scholler, and Ken Weber, NORAC
Inc.; Matthew Benson, Composites
Technology Center, Winona (Minnesota)
State University; Peter Joyce, U.S.
Naval Academy at Annapolis; Charles
Botsford, P.E., AeroVironment Inc.;
Steve Nutt, Ph.D., Merwyn C. Gill
Composites Center, University of
Southern California; Jack Beauchamp,
Ph.D., California Institute of Technology;
Donald Klosterman, Ph.D., Center for
Basic and Applied Composites Research,
University of Dayton (Ohio); Hilary
Gregg, M.A., La Canada, California;
John D. Tickle, Strongwell; Frank
Moore, The Boeing Company; Terry
Price, M.A., Cerritos Community
College, Norwalk, California;
and Sven Rundman.
Thanks to members of Troop 4
and Troop 5, Austin, Texas, for their
assistance with photography.
The Boy Scouts of America is grate-
ful to the men and women serving on
the National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.


Composite Materials Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
The Boeing Company, courtesy—page 22
Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division, FSA/OWI
Collection—pages 12 (all) and
25 (boat)
M.C. Gill Corporation or Royal Plastic,
courtesy—pages 24, 70 (all except
top right), 72, and 73
Mike Mills, Scaled Composites
photographer, courtesy—pages 2
(flyer) and 8 (flyer)
©2004 Mojave Aerospace Ventures LLC,
courtesy; photos by David M. Moore.
SpaceShipOne is a Paul G. Allen
Project.—cover (SpaceShipOne); pages
6–7 (both SpaceShipOne photos), 41
(nitrous tank), 70 (top right), and 71
©Ossur, www.ossur.com/en-us,
courtesy—page 26 (all)
Reichhold Inc., courtesy—pages 44
(data sheet) and 45
Trident Custom Boats, courtesy—
pages 31 and 40
U.S. Air Force Museum—
page 15 (plane)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 32
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
John McDearmon—pages 13, 35–38
(all illustrations), and 63
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!