RG
is
ner
gh
s,
estDENTISTRY
STEM-Based


DENTISTRY
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35882
ISBN 978-0-8395-3394-8
©2021 Boy Scouts of America
2021 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Denistry or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.


DENTISTRY 3





DENTISTRY 5
Contents
The History of Dentistry. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Tooth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
At the Dentist’s Office . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Careers in Dentistry . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Dentistry Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62


St. Apollonia, the Catholic patron saint of Dentistry, lived in Alexandria, Egypt, in the
third century. In 249, Apollonia was tortured in an attempt to force her to give up her
faith. After Apollonia’s teeth and facial bones were fractured, she was threatened with
being burned alive. Apollonia leapt into the flames, sealing her beliefs with her life.
Catholics now invoke Apollonia’s name to aid with the pain of toothaches.


DENTISTRY 7
.The History of Dentistry
The History of Dentistry
Since the earliest people got their first teeth, humans have
suffered mightily from gum disease and tooth decay. Treating
these dental problems often caused more pain than the disease
itself, so it is no wonder that people feared—and still fear—the
tooth-puller.
Hippocrates (from ancient Greece, known as the Father
of Medicine) suggested that people were prone to toothaches
if their bodily fluids, or humors, were out of balance. He
recommended treating infected teeth with cauterization and
astringents, and even bloodletting. This idea of opening a vein
to let blood out was popular even in the 1900s.
At one time medicine and dentistry were not separate
professions. As the practice of bloodletting caught on, many
physicians decided to defer dental procedures to barber
surgeons, who cut hair and pulled teeth.
In many ancient cultures, the tooth represented vitality
and immortality. When someone had a toothache,
spiritual leaders would treat it with amulets,
prayers, and incantations. Mystery and
superstition surrounded the tooth’s power to
produce pain. Demons were blamed. And tooth
worms, pictured at right. Many people believed
that worms bored holes into the teeth and
caused pain by thrashing about. Healers tried
to smoke the worms out of the cavities or kill
them with concoctions of urine and spider
juice. This belief persisted into the Middle Ages.


8 DENTISTRY
The History of Dentistry.
During the Renaissance, when the arts and sciences
flourished, lead and gold fillings were used for the
first time to stop tooth decay. In 1683, the Dutch
naturalist Anton van Leeuwenhoek looked into his
microscope and discovered animalcules (bacteria)
in his tooth scrapings (plaque).
In 1728, Pierre Fauchard, who is regarded as the
father of modern scientific dentistry, published his
book The Surgeon-Dentist, or Treatise of the
Teeth. In it he put forth several ideas that are
still current: the importance of keeping the
teeth clean because oral health affects the
whole body; the need for specialized
dental education; the necessity of scaling
teeth and cleaning the root surfaces to
prevent gum or periodontal disease; the
need to align teeth in the jaw; and
instructions for using ivory in dentures,
connecting them with springs, and
coloring the artificial teeth.
Dentistry, as a distinct field of medicine, developed in
the 1800s. Baltimore College of Dental Surgery, the first dental
college in the world, was founded in 1840. At the same time,
Horace Wells discovered that he could perform painless tooth
extractions by giving nitrous oxide gas—laughing gas—to his
patients. Then William Morton successfully used ether as a
general anesthetic. In 1858, local anesthetics were given by
injection of a drug made from cocaine.
In 1890, Willoughby D. Miller, an American dentist,
discovered how plaque forms and can lead to the destruction
of teeth. Other dentists began to teach preventive measures for
getting rid of plaque and avoiding tooth decay and gum disease.
X-ray photos of the teeth were taken for the first time in 1896.
For thousands of years, excessive wear from chewing
coarse foods accounted for most tooth loss. But as
civilizations developed and refined sugar found its way
into the diet, tooth decay claimed more teeth. Sugar
was expensive, so the wealthy were more likely than
poor people to suffer from caries, or tooth decay.


DENTISTRY 9
.The History of Dentistry
Dental treatment has evolved rapidly in the past century.
Adding fluoride to the public water supply has dramatically
reduced the incidence of tooth decay. Dental drills and
ultrasonic cleaning tools help make a visit to
the dentist’s office quick and more pleasant.
We can be glad that the days of the tooth
worm are behind us.
The development
of things like
newer and
stronger bonding
agents, techno-
logically advanced
orthodontic and
facial surgical
procedures, and
safer anesthetics
has made today’s
dentistry as
sophisticated,
accurate, and
safe as any other
modern field
of medicine.


10 DENTISTRY
The Tooth.
The Tooth
Your pearly whites do a lot more than just peek out from under
that winning smile. Teeth have all sorts of duties, so the next
time the dentist asks you to open wide, remember that healthy
teeth will help you eat, speak, and look great!
Eating. The main function of teeth is to break food into small
pieces that you can swallow safely and digest. The different
shapes and structures of teeth allow for the different functions
of biting, tearing, and grinding.
Speech. Although every normal child is born with a voice, he
or she must learn to speak. The parts of the body designated
for breathing, chewing, and swallowing work together to create
speech. The teeth help to form words.
Appearance. Teeth help to form the shape of the face.
The canines, or cuspids, at the corners of the
mouth give the smile a pleasant symmetry.
But missing teeth may turn a smile
into an embarrassed tight-lipped
expression or make the cheeks
look hollow.
Humans are omnivores. We
eat everything—animal and
plant materials—so we need
teeth that will grind a steak,
crush a pinto bean, and slice
off a piece of celery.


DENTISTRY 11
.The Tooth
The Structure of the Tooth
The two basic parts of a tooth are the crown and the root.
The tooth is a living structure, made up of four dental tissues:
enamel, dentin, cementum, and pulp.
The Crown
The crown is the part of the tooth visible above the gum.
An outer layer of enamel protects it from wear and decay. The
hard surface on the top of the crown is for biting and chewing.
The Root
The root is the part of the tooth that is below the gum and
holds the tooth in the bone. It makes up almost two-thirds of
the total length of the tooth. In a healthy mouth, the root
should not be visible. It is firmly embedded in a socket in the
jaw and protected on its outer surface by a thin layer of hard
tissue called cementum. Depending on its function, a tooth
may have one, two, or three roots.
CROWN
ROOT
ENAMEL
PULP
GINGIVA
ALVEOLAR BONE
DENTIN
PERIODONTAL
LIGAMENT
CEMENTUM
APICAL FORAMEN
Parts of a tooth
The bones that
hold the teeth
consist of the
upper bones of the
mouth, called the
maxilla, and the
lower structure of
the mouth, called
the mandible.


12 DENTISTRY
The Tooth.
Enamel
Composed of calcium and phosphate crystals, enamel is the
hardest substance in the human body. It protects the dentin
and pulp from the impact of grinding and chewing, as well as
from corrosive acids and enzymes in the mouth. Because of its
unique structure, enamel can withstand drastic temperature
changes. For example, your tooth enamel won’t crack if you eat
a bowl of ice cream and then drink a mug of hot apple cider.
Even though enamel is hard, it is still vulnerable. When
a tooth erupts (comes through the gum), the cells that make
enamel die. Without living cells, enamel has no way to repair
itself. So any defects that occurred when the enamel formed, or
any damage sustained from decay or wear, will always remain.
Dentin
Dentin is a bonelike tissue that makes up the main portion of
the tooth. At the crown, dentin is covered with enamel; at the
root, with cementum. It is a highly porous, slightly yellow
substance that, when stained by foods, drinks, tobacco, or
antibiotics, can turn orange, brown, or black. Dentin surrounds
the pulp, except at the end of the root (the apical foramen)
where the blood vessels and nerves enter the pulp cavity.
Tooth enamel
reacts with
various minerals
in the mouth and
gets harder over
time, which might
explain why
children may be
more susceptible
to tooth decay
(or caries)
than adults.
A tooth is not really white. Enamel has a gray or bluish tint. It is
semitransparent and reveals the color of the dentin underneath.


DENTISTRY 13
.The Tooth
Cementum
Cementum is a thin, hard tissue that covers and protects
the outer surface of the root. It is softer than enamel and
similar to bone but without the blood vessels and nerves.
It is attached to the fibers of the periodontal ligament,
helping connect the root to the bone, just like
ligaments connect bones in any other joint in the body.
Pulp
Pulp is the soft tissue that occupies a space inside the
tooth called the pulp cavity or chamber. The pulp
extends down the roots of the tooth in the pulp
canals, or root canals, to the apical foramen where
the pulp tissue leaves the tooth and enters the bone.
It contains sensory nerves, blood vessels, odontoblasts
(a kind of cell), and fibrous connective tissue.
The vessels connect the tooth with the rest of the body;
they supply nutrients for the dentin but can also spread disease
and infection throughout the body. Odontoblasts are cells that
make up the outer lining of the pulp and extend through
narrow channels, or tubules, into the dentin. These cells
continually form new dentin. The dentin tends to grow inward,
making the pulp chamber and root canals smaller. Over time,
the tooth becomes insensitive. However, if the pulp is damaged
or dies, then the dentin will no longer be maintained, and the
tooth will die.
Different Teeth for Different Tasks
The shape of the tooth determines its function. The six front
teeth in the upper and lower jaws have single, sharp edges—
like knives. The 10 back teeth in each dental arch have large
blunt surfaces for grinding food.
Humans chew mainly by moving their lower jaw
up and down, with only a slight side-to-side
motion. The front teeth slide across each other
like the blades of scissors, and the back teeth
meet with force to crush and compress the food
like a compactor.
A dead tooth may
or may not need
to be extracted.
If the tooth’s pulp
is damaged, you
may need a root
canal to prevent
the tooth
from dying.


14 DENTISTRY
The Tooth.
Incisors
The four flat front teeth in both the upper and lower dental
arches (the central and lateral incisors) have spade-shaped edges
for cutting and slicing. Incisors typically have a single root.
Canines or Cuspids
These four “doglike” teeth next to the lateral incisors each have a
single cusp, or point on the surface, for holding and tearing food.
The root of the canine is extra long and large to secure the
tooth in the bone so it won’t come loose from the tearing
movements. The surface of the tooth is smooth and the cusp is
rounded, so the canine tends to be self-cleaning. Because the
tooth is resistant to decay and is firmly anchored in the
jawbone, the canine is often the last tooth lost to age.
Premolars or Bicuspids
These first and second premolars share characteristics with
molars and canines. They each have a large chewing surface,
like the molar, and cusps (in this case, two), like the canine.
These teeth crush and tear food. Premolars have one, two, or
sometimes three roots.
Molars
The two or three teeth farthest back
in the mouth are the molars (first,
second, and third). These are the
largest teeth, with broad surfaces
and three to five cusps for
grinding. The curving roots of the
molars anchor the teeth deeply in the
jawbone to withstand the tremendous
chewing pressures exerted. The lower
molars have two roots, and the upper
ones almost always have three.
Incisor Canine
or cuspid molar
Bicuspid Molar
The canines, or
cuspids, are also
known as
“eyeteeth.” Folk
wisdom held that
the eyeteeth were
connected to the
eyes, and that
pulling an eyetooth
could make the
patient blind.
The third molars,
also called the
wisdom teeth,
most often appear
during the late
teens or early 20s.
Meat-eating animals such as
tigers have oversized cuspids
for killing and eating their prey.


DENTISTRY 15
.The Tooth
Support for the Tooth
The supportive tissues of the tooth are called the
periodontium, which includes the periodontal
ligament, the alveolar bone, and the gingiva, or
gums. The cementum, periodontal ligament, and
alveolar bone connect the teeth to the jaws. When
one of these is damaged or missing, the tooth will
loosen and eventually fall out. The supportive
tissues actually get stronger from vigorous use.
However, if a part of the mouth is not used
because of missing teeth, malocclusion (a “bad bite”), or pain
from advanced caries, then the supporting structures will
weaken and cause much damage.
Periodontal Ligament. This strong, fiberlike tissue anchors the
root to the bone and cushions the surrounding bone against
the shock of chewing and biting. When extracting a tooth, the
dentist cuts the periodontal ligament that connects the tooth to
the bone.
Alveolar Bone. The bony part of the upper and lower jaws
that surrounds and supports the roots of the teeth and the gums
is called the alveolar bone. Alveolar means “hollow.” The alveo-
lar bone has hollow places, or sockets, that house the roots of
the teeth.
Gingiva. This thick pink tissue—known as the gums—covers
the necks of the teeth and all of the alveolar parts of the jaws.
It fits tightly, except for gaps between the tooth and gum, called
gingival crevices, where food particles
and bacteria can collect. If teeth are
not cleaned carefully and frequently,
then calculus, a material made when
plaque hardens, will form and
periodontal (gum) disease will set in.
Healthy gums, left, fit tightly
around the whole root and part
of the enamel. Unhealthy gums,
above, leave gaps, increasing
the potential for disease and
tooth decay.


16 DENTISTRY
The Tooth.
Development and Eruption of Teeth
Under normal circumstances, you will develop two sets of teeth
in your lifetime: the primary set and the permanent set.
Primary Teeth
The first set of teeth—called primary, baby, milk, or
deciduous—is temporary but affects the future of your mouth
in important ways. These teeth help to form facial contours
and help you develop speech and the ability to chew. They also
maintain space so that the permanent teeth can erupt in the
correct formation.
Proper care of the primary teeth is critical. Decay and
infections can spread to the permanent teeth even before
they have emerged. Premature loss of baby teeth to decay or
accidents may cause permanent teeth to erupt in the wrong
positions, requiring orthodontic treatment (such as braces).
If a tooth comes out before it is supposed to, the dentist will
decide whether to replace it. Sometimes the jaw is growing
quickly, spaces are naturally occurring, and the permanent
tooth has room to erupt. However, the dentist may fit a metal
or plastic device into the gap to help maintain that space until
the permanent tooth is ready to come in.
CENTRAL INCISOR
LATERAL INCISOR
CANINE
FIRST MOLAR
SECOND MOLAR
Maxillary primary teeth
SECOND MOLAR
FIRST MOLAR
CANINE
LATERAL INCISOR
CENTRAL INCISOR
Lower primary teeth


DENTISTRY 17
.The Tooth
Baby teeth form as tiny buds while the child is still in the
mother’s womb. At birth, all primary teeth and the permanent first
molars are present but still below the gums. When the baby is
around 6 months of age, some of the primary teeth
are ready to slowly slide through the gums. At the time an
incisor erupts, the root is only two-thirds formed. It may take four
years after the tooth appears for the apical foramen, periodontal
ligament, cementum, and alveolar bone to fully develop. Healthy
The small bumps on the biting surface of the tooth
are called mamelons. They will wear down in a few
years as the teeth contact the teeth of the opposing
jaw. If they don’t, then the dentist probably will check
for malocclusion, a problem with the way the teeth
meet when the jaws close.
Mamelons


The Tooth.
primary teeth should be a milky white color. Tooth color other
than white indicates a malformation of the enamel and a great risk
for tooth decay.
The set of primary teeth includes 20 teeth, 10 each in the
upper and lower jaws. Each jaw, or dental arch, contains two
central incisors, two lateral incisors, two canines or cuspids,
two first molars, and two second molars. These erupt in
sequence, starting with the lower central incisors and then
the upper central incisors. The alternating eruption pattern of
matching teeth in opposing jaws ensures that the child can bite
and chew, and therefore digest, food properly.
The sequence of eruption is more important than when the
teeth erupt. Boys’ teeth tend to erupt later than girls’ teeth. This
may be an advantage because teeth that remain under the gum
longer have a higher resistance to dental caries because of the
extra time the tooth has to absorb the chemical compound
fluoride. Most 3-year-olds have a complete set of primary teeth
with fully developed roots.
Around the age of 4, the child’s jaws grow dramatically,
creating gaps between the teeth. Then, at 6, the permanent first
molars erupt. The roots of the primary teeth begin to dissolve (or
resorb), the crowns lose support, and the teeth fall out (exfoliate).
Permanent Teeth
A full set of permanent teeth has 32 teeth (four central incisors,
four lateral incisors, four canines or cuspids, four first
premolars or bicuspids, four second premolars or bicuspids,
four first molars, four second molars, and four third
molars, or wisdom teeth). By the age of 13, most
people have 28 permanent teeth. The third
molars erupt (if at all) by the early 20s.
The permanent teeth are yellowish in
color, much larger than primary
teeth, and closely spaced.
The first molar (6-year-old
molar) is the first permanent tooth
to erupt and is the key to proper


DENTISTRY 19
.The Tooth
CENTRAL INCISOR
LATERAL INCISOR
CUSPID
FIRST PREMOLAR
SECOND PREMOLAR
FIRST MOLAR
SECOND MOLAR
THIRD MOLAR
Upper permanent teeth
THIRD MOLAR
SECOND MOLAR
FIRST MOLAR
SECOND PREMOLAR
FIRST PREMOLAR
CUSPID
LATERAL INCISOR
CENTRAL INCISOR
Lower permanent teeth
placement of the permanent teeth.
If it emerges in the correct position,
with healthy primary teeth next to
it, it serves as a guide for the rest of
the permanent teeth. But if the
primary tooth next to the first molar
is missing, the molar will tip or drift
out of position and misdirect the
eruption of the other teeth.





DENTISTRY 21
.Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime
Keeping Your Teeth
for a Lifetime
Once your permanent teeth replace your primary teeth, you are
set for the rest of your life. If you take care of these teeth, you
can avoid having to buy a third set—dentures.
Enemies of Your Teeth and Gums
Tooth decay, or dental caries, is a destructive infectious disease
caused by specific bacteria that feed on sugars in food and
produce enamel-attacking acids. If left untreated, decay will
work its way through the enamel, dentin, and pulp and
eventually to the alveolar bone. In the worst case, the infection
could spread through the bloodstream to other parts of the
body, causing specific reactions that could result in death.
Plaque
Tooth decay generally begins with the formation
of plaque, which contains a sticky substance
called dextran. Bacteria digest sugars, producing
dextran and acids. Plaque sticks to teeth and
dental restorations (crowns, bridges, fillings,
dentures, and implants) and holds those acids
in close contact with the tooth surface.
Plaque accumulates in the pits and fissures
of the molars and bicuspids, between teeth,
and in crevices below the gum line. If it is not
removed quickly and the acids are left undis-
turbed, the acids will react chemically with the
minerals in enamel and dissolve them. The cycle of plaque
formation and the process of tooth decay continue as long
as colonies of bacteria are permitted to cling to the plaque
on the teeth and feed on the constant supply of sugar that is
introduced throughout the day, every day.
Plaque typically accumulates in
hard-to-reach places—the pits
and fissures of teeth, between
teeth, and in crevices below the
gum line.


Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime.
Calculus
You can remove plaque easily by brushing and flossing
diligently. But if you ignore plaque, it will eventually absorb
calcium salts from saliva and harden into calculus, or tartar.
Because calculus is rough and impossible to scrape off without
special dental tools, it attracts more bacteria, which irritate and
inflame the gums.
Acids
Strong acids in the mouth can dissolve enamel, causing
holes—or cavities—in the teeth. As the cavity gets
bigger, the acids can reach the softer dentin, which is
more susceptible to caries. If the cavity is not treated,
bacteria can swarm through the dentin to the pulp and
attack the nerves and blood vessels. The pulp gets
infected but cannot swell inside the tooth, so the infec-
tion spreads through the root canals into the tooth
socket, causing an abscess.
Besides eating sugary foods, which bacteria use to
produce acids, you may do other things that cause
strong acids to attack the teeth and irritate the gums.
Sucking on a lemon; putting an aspirin directly on a
mouth sore; drinking fruit juices, energy drinks, and
carbonated beverages, which contain acids as well as
sugar; and bingeing and purging (an eating disorder
called bulimia) all expose the mouth to corrosive
stomach acids. Additionally, a condition known as
gastroesophageal reflux disease, or GERD, can have a
devastating effect on the enamel in teeth.
Saliva is slightly alkaline and can neutralize
the acid in the mouth. If plaque is allowed to
remain on the teeth, it locks in the acids
and prevents the saliva from washing them
away. It takes 20 to 40 minutes for the
saliva to completely neutralize the
acids. If you eat candy or drink sodas
throughout the day, however, your
mouth will stay acidic and decay will
continue without a break.
DECAY
ABSCESS


DENTISTRY 23
.Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime
Sugars
Sugar is the main staple in the diet of plaque-
forming bacteria. If you reduce the amount of sugar you
eat, bacteria do not have as much fuel to produce tooth-
destroying acid. However, the more sugar you eat, the
more acids the bacteria produce to attack the teeth.
Sweets are particularly harmful because they stay
in or stick to the mouth for a long time: hard candy,
cough drops, breath mints, non-sugarless chewing gum,
caramels, pastries, and dried fruit. If starch sticks to the
teeth, an enzyme in saliva called amylase can convert the
starch to sugar, and then the acid-producing cycle starts again.
Tobacco
Smoking and chewing (smokeless)
tobacco do not cause tooth decay but
will, at the very least, stain your teeth
and foul your breath. Tobacco can
cause sores, a white plaque on the roof
of the mouth, tooth loss, loss of jawbone,
and gum disease.
Tobacco irritates the soft tissues
of the mouth—gums, tongue, palate
(the roof of the mouth), and lining of
the cheeks. Smoking depletes vitamin
C, which healthy gums need. Smoking
also reduces the flow of saliva, which
helps clean the lining of the mouth and
protect teeth from decay. Nicotine
constricts the blood vessels, limiting the
supply of blood and oxygen to the tissues. These factors, along
with the excess tartar buildup (particularly for pipe smokers),
increase the risk of getting gum disease. In fact, tobacco
may interfere with the treatment of gum disease and make
it ineffective.
Studies show that tobacco use can be a major factor in
raising the risk of oral cancer. Smokers are four to 18 times more
likely than nonsmokers to develop oral cancer. Pipe smokers risk
getting lip cancers where the pipe stem rests. Users of smokeless
tobacco are up to 50 times more likely to get cancer in the
cheeks, gums, and lips. The use of either smoking or chewing
tobacco is considered to be the leading cause of oral cancer.
Tobacco users are more likely than
nonusers to suffer from excessive tartar
buildup and periodontal disease, to get
oral cancer, and—as an added bonus—
to have bad breath.


24 DENTISTRY
Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime.
Genetics
Many factors affect the development of teeth and of oral and
facial structures. During pregnancy, the mother may be exposed
to chemical or environmental hazards. She may run a high
fever for a long time, take certain medications or substances
(such as alcohol or drugs), or have severe nutritional deficiencies.
All of these influences can cause defects in the enamel and
dentin of the baby’s teeth, especially if they happen while the
teeth, jaws, and face are forming.
Heredity plays a major part in the health of the teeth and
supporting structures. “Good” or “bad” teeth can run in the
family. Genetics determines how white teeth are, how quickly
and how much the teeth will discolor, whether gums are
predisposed to chronic swelling, and whether a person might
develop an autoimmune disease that dries out the saliva and
keeps it from neutralizing acids.
The range of possible genetic defects includes missing
a complete set of permanent teeth; developing too many teeth
or teeth that are unusually small or large; teeth that are fused
together or share one root canal; a cleft lip and/or palate; and
upper and lower jaws that don’t match in size or meet properly.
Early Warning Signs of Cancer
• A swelling, lump, or growth in the mouth that does not heal
• White or red patches inside the mouth that don’t go away
• Loose teeth for no apparent reason
• Unusual bleeding in the mouth or nose
• Numbness or tingling in the lips or tongue
• Persistent sore throat
• Difficulty swallowing or in opening the mouth
• Persistent cough or hoarseness
People who have any of these signs or symptoms should see a dentist.
Using newer technology that sees beneath the surface, dentists can
detect oral cancers at an early stage when they are most treatable.
For preteens and
teenagers, growth
and development
factors and tongue
thrust play an
important role in
oral shaping and
tooth positioning.
For example, large
palatine tonsils and
adenoids can
cause mouth
breathing, which
changes the shape
of the oral cavity.


DENTISTRY 25
.Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime
Preventing Tooth Decay and Gum Disease
You can’t control what kind of teeth you inherit, but you can
control how well you care for your teeth and gums. Develop
good habits of oral hygiene, and make good choices about eating.
How to Brush
The key to preventing caries and periodontal disease is controlling
plaque. Whether you use a manual or electric toothbrush, or
toothpaste or tooth gel, is not as important as whether you brush
your teeth regularly, thoroughly, and correctly.
The American Dental Association (ADA) suggests selecting
a toothbrush that is small enough to reach every face of the
teeth, with soft, round-ended bristles, a flat brushing surface,
and a straight handle. A dry brush cleans better than a wet one,
so alternate two brushes.
Choose a fluoride toothpaste that is not too abrasive.
Brands that claim to remove tough stains (caused by tobacco
and coffee) and whiten teeth can also make the teeth sensitive
by removing cementum and exposing the dentin. (Excessive
pressure can wear away enamel, too.)
Dentists recommend brushing your teeth a minimum of
twice a day, after the first and last meals. Proper brushing
shouldn’t take longer than three minutes. If you are going to
prevent the buildup of plaque, you must interrupt its formation
once every 24 hours.
Replace your
toothbrushes
after three months
of use (or before
if they are worn
out) and after
an illness. And
never share a
toothbrush. You
can “catch”
tooth decay
and periodontal
disease—you
can spread
plaque- and
disease-producing
bacteria through
saliva.
The mouth is the window to wellness. How so? Medical professionals
now recognize periodontal disease to be much broader in nature than
a simple oral problem. Dental well-being can have far-reaching health
effects. For instance, dentists are seeing oral signs of sleep apnea, and
diagnosing genital HPV (human papillomavirus, a family of more than
100 related viruses). In short, dental experts often are a patient’s first
line of defense. They are now part of every patient’s general medical
team, working together for the patient’s overall health.


26 DENTISTRY
Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime.
Develop a plan of attack that you can follow routinely.
You may prefer to brush all the outside surfaces first, or you
may decide to divide your mouth into quadrants and brush
each area inside and out before moving on to the next section.
Using the proper
technique for
brushing your
teeth will
help ensure
effective cleaning.
1) To brush the outside surfaces, set the bristles against the
teeth near the gums at a 45-degree angle. Move the brush
gently back and forth in short strokes about a half a tooth
wide. Clean one or two teeth at a time. Brush along the gum
line, too. Use the same technique to clean the inside surfaces.
2) For the incisors, you may find it easiest to clean them by
holding the brush vertically and using up-and-down strokes.
3) Then, with the brush held flat, scrub the chewing surfaces.
Be sure to brush every surface, particularly the hard-to-reach
ones like the most-often neglected tongue side of all molars
and the cheek side of the upper molars.
4) Finish up by lightly brushing your palate and tongue
(from back to front).
1 2
3 4


DENTISTRY 27
.Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime
Brushing Teeth With Braces
Having braces may be uncomfortable for a while, but it is ultimately
a good thing for your mouth and teeth. People with braces need to be
especially careful when brushing because the wires and brackets can
trap the bacteria and food particles that cause decay. While brushing
techniques used to clean braces are similar to those used to clean
teeth alone, paying special attention to wires and brackets is
very important.
If you have clear aligners, be
sure to brush your teeth before
replacing aligners. Avoid sweet
and acidic fluids while wearing
clear aligners. These fluids can
pool inside the aligners for
extended periods, which can
be particularly damaging to
your teeth.
1) Start by cleaning the teeth above the wires of the braces. Set the bristles against
the teeth near the gums at a 45-degree angle, then move the brush gently back and
forth in short strokes about a half a tooth wide. Clean one or two teeth at a time.
2) Then carefully clean the teeth below the wire.
3) Next, thoroughly clean the wire and brackets by brushing on top of the wire in a
circular motion. Finish by cleaning the chewing surfaces, tongue, and palate as usual.
1
2 3


28 DENTISTRY
Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime.
Because you can’t see plaque with the naked eye, you
can’t know for sure that you have gotten all of it off your teeth
unless you use a harmless dye called a disclosing agent. Using a
disclosing agent occasionally will help you learn how to
effectively brush your teeth. You can either chew a disclosing
tablet or swish a solution around your mouth. The dye will
stain any remaining plaque. Clean the missed areas with your
toothbrush, and remember to spend more time on those places
the next time you brush. After cleaning your teeth, rinse
thoroughly with water or a mouthwash containing fluoride.
How to Floss
Many people use dental floss (a thread usually made of nylon)
from time to time like toothpicks—to dislodge bits of food
caught between the teeth. But using floss every day between
every tooth, below the gum line, and under fixed bridges actu-
ally loosens the plaque that a toothbrush can’t reach.
Ideally, you should floss whenever you brush. If you floss
only once a day, however, do it at bedtime. Wrap about 18
inches of waxed or unwaxed floss around your middle fingers
until you have an inch or two of floss between them. Hold the
floss taut and guide it between two teeth. Curve the floss
against a tooth and slide it gently under the gum line. Scrape it
up and down on the surface of that tooth, and then curve the
floss on the other tooth and repeat the process.
Let’s See Those Pearly Whites
Sporting whiter teeth is all the rage these
days, and there are several ways to get
them. There are lots of whitening tooth-
pastes on the market that, with regular
and thorough brushing, help remove sur-
face stains to reveal the tooth’s natural
whiter color. The hydrogen peroxide used
in many bleaching agents, however, actu-
ally makes teeth whiter by bleaching the
porous enamel surface. No matter which
whitening method you choose, make
sure to get a dentist’s opinion and super-
vision before beginning treatment.
February is
National
Children’s Dental
Health Month.


DENTISTRY 29
.Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime
Start at the rear molar on one side of the upper jaw and
work to the center. Then move to the other rear molar and
work back to the center. Do the same for the lower jaw. Let out
more floss as you move along, or replace it if gets heavy with
plaque or starts to fray.
If teeth are so tightly spaced that you can’t get the
floss between them, use a floss threader and insert it into the
space below the contact points. This also works to get under
a fixed bridge.
Rinse your mouth thoroughly when you finish. Your
gums may bleed a little if you have gingivitis
(inflammation of the gums) or if you were too
rough. But keep at it, with a gentler touch.
After a few days of flossing, the
bleeding will probably stop.
Flossing reduces
your risk of
developing gum
and bone disease
and is so impor-
tant to oral health
that Dr. Michael F.
Roizen, author of
Real Age: Are You
as Young as You
Can Be?, suggests
that flossing every
day can add two
years to your
life expectancy.


30 DENTISTRY
Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime.
How Fluoride Helps to Prevent Tooth Decay
Fluoride is a chemical compound that forms when fluorine
combines with other elements. If enough fluoride is in the body
when teeth are developing, it will react with other minerals to
make the tooth enamel extra strong and extra resistant to the
acids that cause tooth decay. After teeth are formed, fluoride
reinforces enamel and also acts with minerals in saliva to
restore enamel in the earliest stages of decay.
Fluoride is present everywhere, in varying amounts.
The concentration of fluorides in the soil, water, and plants
in certain areas may be lower or higher than in other areas.
We can’t always count on what we eat and drink to give us a
consistent, balanced supply of fluoride to ensure that our teeth
are strengthened and protected, but we can take steps to expose
our teeth to fluoride. You can take fluoride internally or apply
it directly to the surfaces of the teeth.
Fluoridation, or adding fluoride to our water supply, is one
way health officials help protect public health. Studies have
shown that supplementing local water supplies with fluoride
is an effective and economical way to strengthen people’s teeth
against dental caries. Many people choose to drink bottled
water rather than tap water. Most bottled water, however, does
not contain enough fluoride to ward off decay. In-home water
filters not only eliminate impurities in tap water, but some
filters also eliminate vital fluorides from the water supply.
Find out whether
the water in
your home is
fluoridated. If it is,
try to drink eight
glasses of tap
water each day
and know that
while you are
replenishing fluids
in your body, you
are also protect-
ing your teeth
from decay.


DENTISTRY 31
.Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime
If the water supply doesn’t have enough fluoride
to protect teeth, other fluorides can be taken internally
(as food or medicine), including liquid and tablet
supplements. Since ingested fluoride is most effective
on unerupted teeth, it should be introduced at
6 months of age and continue until the second
permanent molars erupt. Specific guidelines for
fluoride supplementation are available from the
American Dental Association.
Erupted teeth also benefit from having fluoride
applied directly to the surfaces and hard-to-clean
spots. Topical fluoride applications should not be
swallowed. For people especially susceptible to caries, the
dentist or hygienist paints a fluoride solution on the teeth or
places gel in a tray inserted temporarily over the upper or
lower arch of the teeth. Everyone (unless advised not to by
a dentist or physician) should use fluoride toothpaste. In fact,
the American Dental Association won’t approve a toothpaste
unless it contains fluoride.
Mouthwashes, or mouth rinses, do little more than mask
breath odors for 15 or 20 minutes. Some contain fluoride or an
antimicrobial agent that fights tartar and/or plaque. While
many mouthwashes do not contain fluoride, they may still have
benefits. Read the label to see whether the mouthwash contains
the plaque fighters cetylpyridinium chloride and domiphen
bromide. Look also for antimicrobial ingredients, such as
sodium benzoate, benzoic acid, or chlorhexidine.
Too Much Is Not Always
Too Good
It is possible to get too much fluoride, which can cause
mottling and pits in the enamel and lead to discolor-
ation of the enamel. This condition, called fluorosis,
happens in areas where the drinking water has too
many fluorides. It doesn’t occur where the water supply
is artificially fluoridated. The upside of this condition is
that although the teeth are stained, they are quite resis-
tant to decay. Bleaching and bonding can help restore
the surface of enamel.
If you don’t see
this sign from the
American Dental
Association on
your toothpaste,
the ADA has
not accepted it.
One of the
reasons may be
that it doesn’t
contain fluoride.


32 DENTISTRY
Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime.
How Good Nutrition Helps
When and how often you eat may affect your dental health
more than what and how much you eat. You don’t have to give
up sugar to protect your teeth. If you eat sweet foods and
drinks only at mealtimes and faithfully brush and floss your
teeth afterward, you can usually avoid tooth decay.
The extra saliva produced to digest a meal will help wash
away or neutralize acids, but eating sugary foods between
meals will keep the acid level of the mouth high. If you must
snack, choose foods that are low in sugar content: peanuts,
popcorn, pretzels, olives, eggs, meats, milk, and plain yogurt.
Even better are raw vegetables and fruits (but not fruit juices)
because they are high in fiber and require vigorous chewing,
which stimulates salivation and cleans the teeth and gums.
Snacking before bedtime is harmful because of the reduced pro-
duction of saliva during sleep. The plaque remains undisturbed
on the teeth for hours.
Healthy people
produce about
6 cups of saliva
a day.
Baby bottle tooth decay (BBTD) is a type of caries in
children younger than 3 years old caused by using a
bottle filled with formula, milk, or fruit juice as a pacifier.
When a baby is put to bed with a bottle filled with
anything other than water (preferably fluoridated), then
the sugars collect around the teeth. The bacteria have all
night to produce acids, which destroy the enamel.


DENTISTRY 33
.Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime
Protecting Teeth From Injury
Apart from decay, accidents are the main cause of tooth injury
and loss in children.
Environmental Hazards
Many teeth have been knocked out because of a jump off a
swing, a shove into a drinking fountain, a fall at the swimming
pool, a skateboard or scooter accident, and poor footing on a
wet tree trunk. Automobile crashes or sudden stops account for
more tooth injuries. Everyone should take safety precautions
to avoid these kinds of accidents. Don’t run or climb on wet
surfaces. Watch where you’re going. Wear a seat belt.
Tooth loss often has an indirect cause. Radiation of the
head or neck, such as in treatment for cancer, can destroy the
salivary glands. The acids created by certain bacteria remain on
the teeth, so decay sets in with a vengeance. Blood disorders
affect the body’s ability to fight infection, making a person
susceptible to periodontal disease.
Mouth Guards
Everyone who plays active sports that are potentially dangerous
to the face and head should wear a mouth guard. This device
helps prevent teeth from getting chipped, fractured, or knocked
out and protects the lips, tongue, and cheeks. The mouth
guard cushions the impact of a blow or fall that
might cause a concussion or broken jaw and
distributes the pressure throughout the jaw.
Often, people
cope with stress
by grinding their
teeth (a habit
called bruxism).
The constant
heavy pressure
can wear down
and loosen teeth.
With regular
examinations, a
dentist can tell
whether a person
has developed
this habit and
can recommend
treatment.
Many people may not know how damaging lip
and tongue jewelry can be to teeth. Dentists have
found these items can chip teeth and cause the gums
to recede.


34 DENTISTRY
Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime.
Wearing a mouth guard is required in many sports, such as
football, basketball, boxing, lacrosse, and ice hockey. People who
surf, skateboard, ride scooters, rodeo, or participate in gymnastics
should also protect their teeth by wearing mouth guards.
You can buy mouth guards in a store, or a dentist can make
them specifically to fit your mouth. Stock mouth guards are
available at sporting goods stores. To keep these in place, you
have to clench your teeth, which may interfere with your
breathing. “Boil-and-bite” mouth guards are made with
moldable plastic that can be softened in warm water. The plastic
then takes the shape of the teeth. To get the best fit and
comfort, ask your dentist to make one from an impression of
your teeth.
Usually, a mouth guard is worn on the upper teeth, but
sometimes people may want one to cover the lower teeth, too,
if they have braces. Whatever mouth guard you choose, be sure
it fits well and that you are able to speak and breathe easily
while wearing it.
Be careful not to
burn your mouth
when inserting
the guard after
heating it.
Face protectors are absolutely necessary if you play a
position in a sport that puts you directly in the line of
something that can hurt your teeth or face. Baseball
catchers and hockey goalies fall in that category.


DENTISTRY 35
.Keeping Your Teeth for a Lifetime
Your Tooth Is Injured . . . Now What?
Injuries range from a tiny fracture in the enamel to broken and
avulsed (knocked out) teeth. You might not see the fracture but
will feel discomfort when chewing or if a sharp edge of the
enamel irritates your lips or tongue. Seek treatment before the
tooth is permanently damaged. If you experience sensitivity to
changes in temperature, or find loose tooth fragments, call your
dentist immediately. Treatment may include capping, bonding,
root canal therapy, or extraction.
If you break your tooth, try to gather the broken pieces.
Rinse your mouth with warm water. Take the pieces to the
dentist, who will determine whether they can be bonded
back onto the tooth. If swelling occurs, apply a cold
compress to the face at the swollen area.
An avulsed tooth can be successfully replanted in
the socket if you act fast. The first 30 minutes after
the tooth is knocked out are critical. Hold it by the
crown—not by the roots as you may destroy any
surrounding tissue. Rinse it in milk, if available, or
hold the tooth under cold running water, and get to
a dentist immediately.
If you can’t replant the tooth, carry it to the dentist under
your tongue or between your cheek and gum. If you are
worried about swallowing the tooth, cover it with milk in a
container or roll it up in a wet towel. Do not allow the tooth to
dry. Go directly to the dentist—and don’t forget the tooth!
If a permanent tooth gets knocked out, the trauma may
cause damage to the nerves and blood supply, and even the
alveolar bone. Often, the pulp dies. A dentist can determine
whether root canal therapy will be necessary. If a primary tooth
gets knocked out, the dentist may decide to insert a space
maintainer to keep the teeth on either side of the space from
moving together before the permanent tooth erupts.
The main reason a replanted adult tooth might be
lost is due to root resorption. This happens when the body
rejects the roots and absorbs them over time. It is important that the den-
tist take an X-ray film of the tooth at least six months after it has been
replanted to make sure that the roots are still intact.





DENTISTRY 37
.At the Dentist’s Office
At the Dentist’s Office
Making a trip to the dentist is the best way to pinpoint
problems in your mouth. Don’t wait until you feel pain to
schedule an appointment, and don’t worry—visiting the
dentist regularly is a gift you can give your mouth!
Equipment and Materials
A dentist’s office is full of interesting tools, equipment,
and supplies that are used to help keep teeth healthy. The
dental unit, which may be freestanding or attached to the
examining chair, holds various pieces of equipment: an
adjustable overhead spotlight, which directs a high-intensity
beam on the mouth; a saliva ejector, or small suction pump
placed in the mouth to keep it dry during treatment; air hoses
for low-speed and high-speed rotary hand pieces or drills; and
an instrument tray.
Other equipment includes an autoclave for sterilizing
instruments, an X-ray machine, and an ultrasonic cleaning
machine, which emits high-speed sound waves that vibrate
the tartar deposits off the teeth.
This ultrasonic cleaner sterilizes dental instruments.
The field of den-
tistry is constantly
improving and
advancing. It is
not possible to
discuss all the
latest innovations
in this pamphlet,
although you may
have heard about
air abrasion
(a drill-less
technique) and
the use of lasers
to eliminate tooth
decay. These
cutting-edge
techniques are
becoming more
widely available.


38 DENTISTRY
The instrument tray holds an assortment of tools for
various tasks. The angled hand mirror helps the dentist
examine hard-to-see tooth surfaces. The explorer is a
metal probe with a curved, pointed end that is used to
poke around in crevices and cavities. The periodontal
probe has a straight tip marked like a ruler and is
used to measure the depth of “pockets,” or spaces
where the gum has pulled away from the teeth. A
scaler is a narrow-bladed instrument for scraping
plaque and tartar off the crown; a root planer
scrapes the buildup off the roots. A water-and-air
syringe is for flushing debris that has just been
scraped off the teeth and for cooling down the teeth
during drilling.
Some other tools include tweezers, a polisher,
hypodermic syringes for injecting anesthetic, and high-
and low-speed rotary hand pieces with their attachments:
drilling and grinding burs, and polishing heads.
Dental materials include dental floss, polishing pastes,
filling materials for cavities, gauze squares, fluoride varnishes,
sealants, and substances for making dental impressions and
artificial teeth. Certain dental supplies, such as disposable
gloves and surgical masks, are used to prevent and control the
spread of infection.
Dental instruments
WATER-AND-AIR
SYRINGE
ANGLED HAND
MIRROR
EXPLORER PERIODONTAL
PROBE
ROOT
PLANER
SCALER
Rotary tools
Dental materials
.


DENTISTRY 39
.At the Dentist’s Office
The Examination
The main purpose of dental care is the prevention of tooth
decay, gum disease, and disorders affecting oral health. Because
decay and disease get worse if left untreated, you should get
your teeth cleaned and examined every six months. To prevent
dental and medical complications that can result from certain
procedures, the dentist must know your medical history,
especially whether you have conditions such as asthma,
allergies, immune system problems, or infectious diseases.
During the examination, the dentist will inspect the
teeth, gums, and tissues of the mouth. Your dentist is
looking for evidence of not only decay and disease but
also problems with the teeth and jaws aligning correctly.
Because much of this information can’t be determined
just by looking in your mouth, the dentist depends on
X-ray films, or dental radiographs, to detect damage and
abnormalities early in their development.


40 DENTISTRY
At the Dentist’s Office.
The Radiograph
The X-ray is a form of electromagnetic radiation that can pene-
trate bone and soft tissues. Dense tissues like teeth and bone
absorb more radiation than soft tissues like cheeks and gingiva.
These substances cast shadows on the film when the X-ray
penetrates them. Teeth and bone will cast more of a
shadow than gums, but they will appear lighter because
the film image is a negative. Caries, abscesses, and
bone loss appear darker than normal. Metal crowns
and fillings look like white patches on the film.
Radiographs are taken inside and outside the mouth,
depending on what views are required. The bitewing films,
taken inside the mouth, show only the crowns and parts of
the roots of two or three pairs of opposing upper and lower
teeth. These radiographs reveal decay between adjacent teeth
and under restorations (materials that replace tooth structure
and function), bone loss from periodontal disease, and
ill-fitting fillings. Bitewing radiographs are typically taken
at 12-month intervals.
View from a bitewing
radiograph
Digital bitewing
Dentistry Goes Digital
Many dentists now use digital radiography instead
of the traditional film-based X-ray for capturing
radiographic images of a patient’s mouth. Doing
so allows dentists to obtain a more extensive view,
in less time, and with more flexibility for storing
and sharing information.


.At the Dentist’s Office
The periapical films, also taken inside the mouth, show the
entire tooth, from the crown to the root and including some of the
periapical bone, which surrounds the root tips. These radiographs
indicate the condition of the root and bone; missing, impacted
(teeth that haven’t erupted and remain fully or partly in the bone),
or fractured teeth; and cysts, tumors, and abscesses.
A full-mouth survey is a combination of
14 or more periapical and bitewing films showing
all the teeth (crowns and roots) as well as all the
surrounding alveolar bone. This set of films is
taken as needed for a specific diagnosis, or at
intervals of about every three to five years.
The occlusal radiograph is another film taken
inside the mouth. It shows the full arch of the bite,
from an upper or lower view, and is useful for locating
abscesses; other problems in the jawbone, such
as extra, unerupted teeth; and stones in the salivary
gland ducts. Most people don’t need this kind of
radiograph except for special instances.
The panoramic radiograph is a wide view that
shows all structures in the lower half of the face:
upper and lower jaws, sinuses, and cheek bones. Dentists
use it to evaluate the general condition of the mouth and
to detect jaw fractures, possible tumors, missing teeth, third
molars, and “hidden” impacted teeth. This radiograph is
taken outside the mouth.
A special X-ray machine automatically moves in a
semicircle around the face and makes a series of exposures.
Many dentists recommend making this kind of radiograph
every five years.
Panoramic X-ray
Panoramic radiograph


42 DENTISTRY
At the Dentist’s Office.
Some people worry about their exposure to radiation when
X-ray films are made. When carefully used, X-rays are not
dangerous; however, dentists take certain precautions to reduce
the risk and the exposure. They use high-speed film, timers,
and filters to reduce the exposure time and eliminate
unnecessary radiation. They also cover the patient with a lead
apron during the X-ray procedure to protect the body,
particularly the reproductive organs, from exposure. This apron
should have a thyroid collar to protect the thyroid gland, which
easily absorbs radiation. Dentists also follow recommended
guidelines about how often to make X-ray films. Finally, more
and more dentists are using digital radiography, which greatly
reduces the exposure to radiation.
The Dental Model
After the dentist examines the mouth and studies the
radiographs, he or she may decide to make a three-
dimensional model of the teeth and jaws. This record is
important for determining the exact position of the teeth
and the relationship between the jaws, particularly if
orthodontics (such as braces) or extensive prosthodontic
repairs (such as dentures) are necessary.


DENTISTRY 43
.At the Dentist’s Office
First, an impression tray that fits the contour of the dental
arch is filled with a sticky impression material that is much like
modeling clay.
Then the tray is pressed over the teeth of one jaw and the
material is allowed to set for a few minutes until it gets firm. The
tray is removed, and the process is repeated for the other jaw.
Later, a dental technician will cast models of the jaws by
pouring dental stone into the impressions, or molds, and letting
it harden.
Then the models are mounted on an articulator, a hinged
device that allows the dentist to open and close the jaws and
study the bite, or occlusion.


44 DENTISTRY
At the Dentist’s Office.
Checking for Decay
To check for decay, the dentist uses a small mirror and explorer
to examine the crown of each tooth. When the probe is poked
into the chewing surface, it will stick or be difficult to remove
if caries is present. A white spot on the tooth indicates that
decalcification (softening of the enamel due to loss of calcium
salts) has begun. A cavity, or hole, is a sign that decay has
destroyed the enamel and penetrated the dentin.
Decay and cavities tend to occur in specific areas of the
teeth where food and bacteria are easily trapped: in grooves
and fissures on the molars and bicuspids; on the surfaces
between adjacent teeth (called proximal surfaces), especially
where one tooth touches another; and in the sulcus, the
V-shaped depression inside the cuff of gum tissue that forms
around the base of the crown.
ENAMEL
GINGIVAINFLAMMATION
AND DEATH
OF THE PULP
ABSCESS
FORMATION
DENTIN
Left unchecked, a small cavity can
expand into the root of the tooth.
More and more
dentists are using
a laser procedure
that gives a digital
reading of the
progression of
decay and can
detect it at a very
early stage. Early
detection of decay
through new
dental technologies
can help
save teeth.


DENTISTRY 45
.At the Dentist’s Office
Checking for Gum Disease
In the past, tooth decay was
the main reason people lost their
teeth. But today, because
fluoridation has helped prevent
decay, the number one reason
for tooth loss in adults younger
than 30 is periodontal disease.
Genetic factors are the leading
cause of periodontal diseases,
but other factors can increase the
risk. Medical conditions such as
diabetes or HIV, smoking or
chewing tobacco, poor nutrition,
impacted teeth, and ill-fitting restorations can make you more
vulnerable to periodontal disease.
The dentist can often tell by a visual examination of the
mouth whether you have periodontal disease, but he or she
also depends on X-ray films of bone loss and a probing
assessment to determine the degree of activity or severity. With
a periodontal probe (manual or automated), the dentist will test
the gums for attachment, depth of the sulcus or pocket, tooth
mobility, bleeding, and bone destruction.
If you have any of these symptoms of periodontal
disease, see your dentist:
1. Gums that bleed when you brush your teeth
2. Gums that are tender, swollen, or red
3. Gums that no longer adhere to the teeth
4. Persistent bad breath
5. Pus in the gingival crevice
6. Loose teeth
7. A change in your bite
8. A change in the way your partial dentures fit
Badly diseased gums


46 DENTISTRY
At the Dentist’s Office.
There are four stages of periodontal disease.
• The first stage is gingivitis, the
inflammation of the gums. Diligent
oral hygiene and routine professional
cleaning can improve the symptoms and
heal the gums.
• The second stage is early periodontitis.
The tissue lining the sulcus becomes
inflamed and swollen; the sulcus deep-
ens, providing a perfect place for bacteria
to multiply; and damage to the tissue
extends as far as the alveolar bone.
• In the third stage, moderate perio-
dontitis, the pockets deepen even
more, harmful bacteria thrive, the
periodontal ligament and alveolar
bone are inflamed, and bone dissolves.
• In the fourth stage, advanced perio-
dontitis, bone loss is so severe that
the tooth is loose in its socket and
eventually will fall out.
Treatment varies depending on the stage of the disease,
from simple tartar scraping and tooth polishing, to removal of
damaged tissue with a spoon-shaped instrument, to scraping
and planing (smoothing) the tooth root, to laser treatment, to
gum surgery. The dentist will sometimes refer a patient with
periodontitis to a specialist called a periodontist.
Checking for Oral Cancer
Of all the places in the body where cancer occurs, the mouth
is the seventh most frequent. Certain oral cancers, such as
cancer of the tongue, are deadlier than colon cancer, breast
cancer, or Hodgkin’s disease. The main victims of oral cancer
are smokers, former smokers, chewing tobacco users, and
heavy drinkers of alcohol. Survival rates improve dramatically if
the oral cancer is detected and treated early.
The most common place for the cancer to develop is
on the lips (particularly the lower lip). This is often the
result of regular exposure to the sun and mostly affects
light-complexioned people. Other areas of oral cancer, in
order of frequency, are the sides and back two-thirds of
the tongue, floor of the mouth, gingiva, roof of the mouth,
and insides of the cheeks.
Advanced periodontitis
Gingivitis


DENTISTRY 47
.At the Dentist’s Office
Cancers of the tongue and floor of the mouth are quite
deadly because they often spread (metastasize) to the lymph
nodes and then to other parts of the body. The opposite
happens, too; sometimes cancer in other parts of the body
spreads to the mouth and causes tumors.
If the dentist suspects cancer, the dentist or an oral surgeon
and maxillofacial surgeon will perform a screening procedure
called a biopsy, which is the surgical removal of a tissue
specimen to determine what kinds of cells are present. An oral
pathologist will examine the tissue under a microscope and
report the findings to the dentist or oral and maxillofacial
surgeon. If the cells are cancerous, then the treatment may
require extensive surgery and/or chemotherapy or radiation
therapy. If surgery is necessary, an oral and maxillofacial surgeon
may remove part of the jaw, tongue, or roof of the mouth.
Cancer treatments (especially radiation and chemotherapy)
reduce the body’s ability to fight infection. In some cases, the
bone tissue in the jaw is destroyed. The dentist will take steps
to reduce that risk by treating tooth and gum problems before
radiation therapy. One serious side effect of radiation of the
head or neck is damage to the salivary glands. If the glands are
destroyed, the mouth dries out, swallowing becomes difficult,
and tooth decay sets in.
You should pay attention to the following
warning signs and let your dentist know if
you have any of these symptoms:
1. A sore in or around the mouth and neck
areas that does not heal within two weeks
2. Unexplained bleeding in the mouth
3. Numbness or loss of feeling in any part of
the mouth
4. Unexplained pain or soreness in the mouth
5. Swelling on the lips, tongue, roof of the mouth, or neck
6. Difficulty chewing or swallowing food
7. A lump or thickening in your cheek that you can feel with your tongue
8. A white or red patch on your tongue, gums, or soft tissues in the mouth


48 DENTISTRY
At the Dentist’s Office.
Scientists have
developed many
tests using human
saliva to diagnose
various illnesses,
including certain
cancers and
viruses. Dentists
use saliva tests to
check a patient’s
susceptibility
to caries.
Blood, Sweat, Tears . . . and Spit?
Our bodily fluids can say a lot about us: a high white
blood cell count can indicate infection; lack of sweat
on a very hot day can signal heatstroke; tears can help
flush an object from the eye. But what can saliva tell
us about the body’s general health? More than you
might think.
Saliva improves the taste of your food. The body
just can’t taste food that is dry. Saliva provides a
natural lubricant that brings out the cheese in your
macaroni, and yes, even the Brussels in your sprouts.
Saliva protects your mouth and teeth. By providing
a protective layer between your mouth and the food
you eat, saliva can help maintain healthy cells inside
your mouth. It allows tooth-damaging food particles
to float away, helping protect your pearly whites from
decay. Also, the pH of saliva closely resembles that of
your teeth, so it helps maintain the mouth’s acidity and
protects teeth from decay.
Saliva helps in digestion. You might not be thinking
about digestion at the dinner table, but as soon as you
take a bite, the saliva in your mouth is getting to work.
The mucus in saliva helps bind food and make its trip
to the stomach easier.
Saliva improves your speech. The natural lubricant
that saliva supplies to your mouth helps keep you from
getting tongue-tied.
Saliva helps keeps your breath fresh. Saliva con-
tains a natural enzyme that slows bacteria production.
When you sleep, the body produces less saliva, so
bacteria—and the smells that go with it—are free to
build up in your mouth. And you wondered where
you get that morning dragon breath!


DENTISTRY 49
.At the Dentist’s Office
Treating Teeth
If caries has not penetrated the enamel, the dentist may apply
a plastic “pit-and-fissure” sealant to prevent bacteria from
attacking the enamel on a bicuspid or molar. He or she may
also paint fluoride on the smooth surface of the tooth, with
repeated topical applications over time, in the hopes that the
enamel will remineralize.
Decayed and Broken Teeth
If caries has penetrated the dentin and
created a cavity, the dentist will remove the
decay and insert a filling. If the damage is
extensive and the tooth is brittle, he or she
will restore the tooth with an artificial crown.
Once decay has reached the pulp, the dentist
or a specialist (an endodontist) will perform
root canal therapy to remove the pulp and
save the tooth. As a last resort, the dentist
will take out the tooth.
If the tooth structure is still sound, the
dentist will fill the cavity with one of several
materials: silver amalgam, gold, composite,
glass ionomers, or porcelain. The choice
depends on various factors such as the
location of the infected or broken tooth, the
size of the decayed area, the strength of the
filling material, aesthetic concerns, and cost.
Silver Amalgam. Silver amalgam is a
mixture, or amalgam, of silver, mercury, and
trace metals. Dentists have used it for more
than a century to fill cavities in the grinding
and chewing surfaces of molars and
premolars. Because of the filling’s dark color,
dentists prefer to use it in the inconspicuous
back teeth and not on the front teeth. If
properly formed, silver amalgam will
completely seal the cavity. It is strong and
durable, easy to insert in one office visit,
cost-effective, and biocompatible—that is, it
won’t irritate the living tissues in the teeth
and gums.
Decayed tooth
Tooth with an artificial crown
Teeth filled with silver amalgam


50 DENTISTRY
At the Dentist’s Office.
Silver amalgam has some disadvantages. It is brittle and
requires adequate tooth support to hold it in place and keep it
from getting chipped or shattered. Unlike the other kinds of
fillings, silver amalgam is not attached or cemented to the
tooth, although sometimes the two may be “bonded.” The
cavity is undercut to lock in the filling when it hardens.
Sometimes the filling becomes loose and falls out, or expands,
causing the tooth to crack. The amalgam may leak at its
margins (where the metal meets the tooth) and discolor the
gums or enamel.
Gold (Foils, Inlays, and Onlays). If decay has destroyed large
areas of the tooth, the dentist may recommend a gold filling,
which is stronger than silver amalgam. Unlike the silver filling,
gold is not brittle and can actually strengthen the tooth
structure. It is lighter in color than silver amalgam and does
not stain the enamel. However, gold does look artificial on
visible tooth surfaces and is much more expensive than other
filling materials.
Most solid gold fillings—called inlays or onlays—are cast
from a mold of the cavity and cemented in place. These aren’t
really fillings because they are made in a dental laboratory.
An inlay is set between the walls of tooth structure, but like a
wedge, it can split the tooth if too much pressure is exerted
to force it into position. With an onlay, gold “lays over” the
natural cusps of the tooth, which have been cut down, and
forms a protective bond.
The cast gold fillings, particularly the onlay, are very
effective but quite expensive. They also require two or three
office visits before the filling can finally be inserted. Between
appointments, the patient must wear a temporary filling to
protect the cavity from contamination and fracture. Although
gold offers a better restoration than other filling materials,
many patients decide against it because of the expense, the
inconvenience, and its unnatural look on the teeth.
Inlays, onlays, and crowns are also used to restore broken or fractured
teeth. Unlike the inlay, which holds the tooth together from the inside, the
crown completely or partially covers the tooth and holds it in place from
the outside. If part of the tooth is broken off and the remaining structure
can’t support a filling, inlay, or onlay, then the dentist will “cap” the tooth
with a crown.


DENTISTRY 51
.At the Dentist’s Office
Composite. Composite is a mixture of plastic resin and fine
reinforcing particles that is naturally white and can be shaded
to match the color of a tooth. With recent developments, these
tooth-colored fillings can last about as long as metal ones. The
composite adheres to the surface of the tooth, so it can be
painted on a discolored tooth or bonded to malformed or
misshapen teeth. This allows the dentist to radically improve
upon appearance of a damaged tooth and also make it stronger
by bonding it together.
Anyone may have unusual sensitivity to any dental
materials, so dentists may have to experiment to find out
what works best for an individual patient.
Porcelain. Porcelain is a ceramic material that, like the compos-
ite, can be colored to match the color of the natural teeth and is
suitable as a filling and as a crown on visible surfaces. Because
of its durability, longevity, and resistance to staining, porcelain
is superior to composite; however, it is more brittle than gold
or silver amalgam. Like gold fillings, it requires several office
visits and is, therefore, more expensive than the amalgam or
composite materials.
Composite techniques are difficult, and certain procedures must be fol-
lowed so that the composites will work. For instance, it is very important
to keep saliva or blood off the tooth once it has been readied for bonding.
Dentists often say that placing composites is “technique-sensitive.” That
means that every step must be done with great care for a good final
result. If composites are not done properly, leakage, tooth pain, damage
to the nerve, and new decay may result.
Before composites
Before porcelain After porcelain
After composites


52 DENTISTRY
At the Dentist’s Office.
Missing Teeth
The main cause of tooth loss is periodontal disease, but dental
caries, injury, congenital problems (problems that exist since
birth), and tumors can all damage the tissues in the mouth and
contribute to this serious condition. Missing teeth should be
replaced immediately, except for the third molars, or wisdom
teeth. It isn’t necessary to replace primary teeth, but the spaces
must be maintained so the permanent teeth can erupt in the
proper alignment.
Most people are eager to replace missing teeth to improve
their appearance, but there are more critical reasons for
replacing them: to restore chewing function and fix a bad bite,
to prevent damage to the remaining teeth, to prevent adjacent
teeth from drifting into the spaces and getting out of alignment,
to support the muscles that control facial expressions, and to
prevent alveolar bone loss. These
factors can lead to total tooth loss,
which can actually cause the face to
collapse.
The dentist, or a specialist called
a prosthodontist, will decide what kind
of treatment is required on the basis of
how many teeth are missing and how
healthy the adjacent teeth and gums
are. A fixed partial denture, or bridge,
is used to replace one or more missing
teeth as long as there are healthy teeth
on either side of the space. The good
teeth are crowned to support and
connect the artificial tooth.
If some of the adjacent teeth are
not strong enough to support the bridge, then the dentist will
make a removable partial denture, which depends in part on
support from the gums and bones of the jaw. If all the teeth are
missing in a dental arch, a full removable denture is necessary.
Complete dentures—substitutes for natural teeth—have their
drawbacks. People sometimes complain that chewing is more difficult,
that the dentures don’t fit properly and make clicking noises when they
talk or eat, and that wearing them makes them gag. So do your best
to keep your own teeth.


.At the Dentist’s Office
Dental implants are another way to deal with
missing teeth. Titanium anchors inserted into the
jawbone act as artificial replacements for tooth
roots. Then, a bridge, denture, or tooth is attached
to the implant.
Implants can be a good idea no matter how
many teeth are missing—from just one tooth, to
all the teeth. They can replace missing teeth if the
bone is healthy, thereby helping to keep the teeth
on either side healthy, too. They are also used
when all the teeth are missing to help give full dentures more
stability. Implants are a popular option because they do not
damage adjacent teeth.
Misaligned Teeth
Teeth that are crowded or crooked are difficult to clean,
which makes them prone to tooth decay and gum disease.
Missing teeth, misaligned teeth, and abnormal jaw structure
affect the way the teeth in both jaws meet, or occlude.
Malocclusion is a bad bite. It can cause the teeth to wear
down unevenly. It may place stress on the tissues, bones,
and joints in the face, causing pain or damage. Misaligned
teeth may prevent a tooth from erupting (impaction), or
they may cause one to grow out too far (for lack of
resistance from an opposing tooth).
Sometimes the dentist can fix the problem by
extracting a tooth. Depending on the degree of tooth
movement necessary, the patient may be referred to an
orthodontist. The specialist may recommend fixed or
removable appliances such as braces and retainers.
George Washington had lost all but one
tooth by the time he became president.
He wore several sets off false teeth,
but they were never made of wood,
as we commonly hear. His dentures
were fashioned from gold, hippopota-
mus ivory, elephant ivory, walrus ivory,
cattle teeth, and human teeth.
Orthodontists prescribe braces or clear aligners for the
treatment of problems like crooked or misaligned teeth,
buck teeth, and overbite or underbite.
Dental implantation
DENTISTRY 53





DENTISTRY 55
.Careers in Dentistry
Careers in Dentistry
The dentist you routinely see for checkups, cavity fillings, tooth
extractions, and cleaning is the general dentist. He or she is
trained to care for the teeth, mouth, and jaws and can
recognize and treat conditions that affect not only the mouth
and supporting structure but also the rest of the body. The
primary focus of a general dentist is operative dentistry, which
is concerned with fixing, repairing, or restoring teeth. The
general dentist is licensed to prescribe certain drugs and to
administer anesthetics. Often, the dentist is the first doctor to
diagnose oral cancer or AIDS.
If someone requires special treatment such as braces,
dental implants, or complicated root canal therapy, the dentist
may refer that person to a specialist who has extra training for
that treatment.
Specialties in Dentistry
The American Dental Association, the states, and the federal
government recognize dental specialties. Each specialty focuses
on a specific type of dental treatment or kind of patient.
Specialists who have met the educational requirements, taking
from two to six additional years in accredited training programs
after dental school, can choose to limit their practices to their
specialty or may also perform general dentistry.
Dental Anesthesiology
Dentist anesthesiologists help manage the pain and anxiety
some patients experience. This is generally done through the
use of local anesthetic injections and intravenous,
intramuscular, or inhalational sedative or general anesthetic
medicines. Anesthesiologists have three or more years of
additional hospital-based training after dental school. Most
dentist anesthesiologists provide their services to the patients of
other dentists in offices, surgical centers, or hospitals.
Ouch! Did you
know that local
anesthesia was
not used widely in
dentistry until the
1930s?


56 DENTISTRY
Careers in Dentistry.
Dental Public Health
Public health dentists focus on the prevention and control of
dental diseases on national and international levels and
promote oral health care through educational programs in
communities and institutions. They generally work for
government agencies such as the United States Public Health
Service, the military, hospitals, and universities. Dentists in this
specialty study trends in dental disease and related disorders
and report this information to other dentists and to the general
public. A specialist in dental public health must earn an
advanced degree and complete a dental public health residency.
Endodontics
An endodontist cares for the inner parts of the teeth. This
specialist is concerned with the prevention, diagnosis, and
treatment of disorders of the dental pulp and tissues surrounding
the root of the tooth. The endodontist is an expert in pulp capping,
root canal therapy, surgical procedures such as root amputation,
and bleaching (for teeth discolored as a result of pulp damage).
Oral and Maxillofacial Pathology
The oral and maxillofacial pathologist studies tissues from the
mouth and maxillofacial region and helps diagnose diseases
such as infections, benign tumors, and cancers. He or she is a
resource person, or consultant, for general dentists and other
specialists. Although some oral pathologists treat patients
referred by general dentists, many work in research
environments in laboratories, hospitals, and dental schools.
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery
This specialty involves the diagnosis and surgical treatment of
diseases, injuries, and birth defects affecting the mouth, face,
jaws, and neck. The oral surgeon performs complicated tooth
extractions (for example, impacted third molars) and biopsies;
reconstructs cleft lips, cleft palates, and malformations of the
facial bones; and replaces teeth with dental implants. He or she
is trained to administer sedatives and anesthetics. It takes an
additional four to six years after dental school to become an
oral and maxillofacial surgeon.
Oral and Maxillofacial Radiology
This specialty provides advanced imaging for patients who have
complex problems. General dentists and specialists usually
request the radiographic imaging and diagnostic interpretations
from oral and maxillofacial radiologists. However, a patient may


DENTISTRY 57
.Careers in Dentistry
sometimes need advanced
imaging techniques that
require sophisticated and
expensive equipment. Like oral
pathologists, oral and
maxillofacial radiologists may
examine patients referred to
them by other dentists or by
physicians. Many of these
specialists work in institutional
settings such as dental schools,
where they teach and also
conduct research.
Orthodontics and Dentofacial Orthopedics
Orthodontists correct malocclusions (bad bites) by straightening
crooked teeth and crowded teeth. They use fixed appliances
(braces) to slowly reposition teeth and removable devices to
change the anatomical relationships of the jaws. Orthodontists
work with oral and maxillofacial surgeon to help correct
significant facial deformities.
Pediatric Dentistry
In general, a pediatric dentist is one who treats children and
teenagers, although some also care for mentally and physically
challenged adults. Pediatric dentists study the growth and
development of children’s facial structure and teeth, and they
are trained in easing the fears of children who are afraid of
going to the dentist.
Orthodontics—
before and after


58 DENTISTRY
Careers in Dentistry.
Periodontics
Periodontics is the specialty concerned with tissues around the
teeth—the gingiva and supporting bone. The periodontist
prevents, diagnoses, and treats the gum disease caused by
plaque, and uses nonsurgical treatments such as scaling, root
planing, and medication application to reduce the quantity of
harmful bacteria and smooth the surface of the root (to slow
the rate of bacterial regrowth). Periodontists also perform
surgical procedures to alter gum tissues and eliminate pockets,
which trap food and the bacterial plaque. Additionally, they
often place implants to restore missing bone and teeth.
Prosthodontics
The purpose of this specialty is to replace all or parts of
damaged or missing teeth in order to restore the normal
chewing function of teeth and to improve the occlusion,
or bite; to prevent further damage; and to improve appearance.
Prosthodontists design, make, and fit inlays, crowns, bridges,
partial and full dentures, and implants. Maxillofacial
prosthodontists work with oral surgeons to replace
lost parts of the face
(such as eyed and noses).
Prosthodontics—before and after


DENTISTRY 59
.Careers in Dentistry
Tooth Sleuths
All humans have a set of mystery-
solving clues right under their nose. Just
like DNA evidence or fingerprints, the
arrangement of a person’s teeth can be
useful in dental forensics—the science of
identifying disaster and crime victims,
and even the suspects, from evidence
found in the mouth.
As the hardest, most durable parts of
the body, human teeth can often withstand a
major impact or fire without a lot of damage. And
although cavities are proof that teeth can decay,
they do not decompose as quickly as the rest of the
body. By comparing a set of teeth to existing dental
X-rays, scientists can be positive if the two are a match,
which can mean closure to a grieving family trying to
identify the remains of loved ones killed in a plane
crash or other disaster. When dental records are not
available, scientists can compare digital photographs of
the teeth to a picture of the smiling person. In fact,
three-dimensional computer technology can even
reconstruct a person’s facial features based just on
skeletal remains.
Before forensic dentistry was introduced,
identifying disaster victims could be done by DNA
testing—which could take up to six weeks. Now DNA
testing can be almost immediately, and the tooth pulp
is an excellent source of DNA, too. The FBI is
developing a national dental identification database
that can compare thousands of dental records and
return possible matches, much like the Automated
Fingerprint Identification Systems that many police and
government agencies use. Using quick identification
techniques made possible by forensic dentistry can
have positive applications in the real world.
Dental identification is
not new. During the
Revolutionary War, for
example, Paul Revere,
who practiced
dentistry along with
silversmithing, was
able to identify Major
General Joseph
Warren, the Surgeon
General of the Army,
after he was killed in
the Battle of Breed’s
Hill. Revere recognized
the ivory and wire
bridge he had made
for Dr. Warren.


60 DENTISTRY
Careers in Dentistry.
Dental Auxiliaries
It takes a team to care for your mouth. After you, the general
dentist has the overall responsibility for your oral health.
But dentists also depend on several other people to help with
diagnosis and treatment.
Dental Hygienist
The dental hygienist, a specially trained and
licensed dental nurse, provides the most important
preventive maintenance services: dental
prophylaxis (teeth cleaning), application of topical
fluorides and sealants, and oral examination for
decay and periodontal disease. The hygienist takes
radiographs, records case histories, charts dental
conditions, and teaches patients how to properly
brush and floss at home.
It takes two to four years of college-level
education to become a registered dental hygienist
(RDH). Before getting licensed, the hygienist must
pass state and national board exams just as
dentists do.
Dental Assistant
The dental assistant helps the dentist work
quickly and efficiently. Assistants sterilize
instruments, obtain X-rays, handle dental
materials, and assist in surgical procedures by
adjusting lights, removing material and fluids from
the surgical site, and handing instruments to the
dentist. The training requirements and
responsibilities of this position vary by state. A
certified dental assistant (CDA) has completed a
one-year approved training program, as do
certified anesthesia assistants (CAA).
Dental Technician
The dental technician is the person on the den-
tist’s team who creates artificial teeth and sets of
dentures. These detail-oriented professionals use
their artistic talents in working with metal, dental
porcelain and acrylics, and even computer-aided
design to make dental implants that perfectly fit
Dental hygienist
Dental assistant


DENTISTRY 61
.Careers in Dentistry
each patient. They work directly with dentists
and orthodontists and have little patient contact.
Education and Cost of Training
The basic training for dentists is four years of dental school
after graduation from college. Upon successful completion of
dental school requirements, the graduate is awarded a doctor of
dental surgery (D.D.S.) or a doctor of dental medicine (D.M.D.)
degree. To practice, he or she must pass both a written national
board and a state or regional examination. After passing the
boards, the dental school graduate may apply to the state board
of dentistry for a license to practice general dentistry. Some
people go right into practice; others may enter a one- or two-
year residency program in general dentistry; and still others
may choose to train for one of the dental specialties.
To become a dental specialist, a dental school graduate
must complete from one to seven additional years of training in
an accredited program sponsored by a dental school or hospital.
Then the dentist is “specialty board eligible.” If he or she
passes the board for that specialty, he or she becomes a “board
certified specialist.” Certificates, not degrees, are awarded for
specialty study.
The sponsoring institution may decide whether the dentist
must pay for his or her advanced training, or whether he or she
should receive a stipend (allowance). It is common practice to
offer paid residency programs in hospitals in the areas of
pediatric dentistry, oral surgery, and general dentistry.
Postgraduate training in dental schools for the other specialties
usually require tuition. When you consider that a
dental specialist has trained for six or more years
after college, you will realize what
an extraordinary commitment that
person has made in terms of time
and money.


62 DENTISTRY
Dentistry Resources.
Scouting Literature
First Aid, Medicine, and Public Health
merit badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Betancourt, Jeanne. Smile!
How to Cope with Your Braces.
Alfred A. Knopf, 1982.
Brazis, D.D.S., Steven J. Your Children’s
Teeth: A Parent’s Guide to
Saving Money at the Dentist.
CreateSpace, 2010.
Breiner, Mark A. Whole-Body Dentistry:
Discover the Missing Piece to Better
Health. Quantum Health Press, 1999.
Friedman, Jay W. Complete Guide to
Dental Health. AuthorHouse, 2002.
Ichord, Loretta Frances. Toothworms
and Spider Juice: An Illustrated
History of Dentistry. The Millbrook
Press, 2000.
Klatell, Jack, Andrew Kaplan, and
Gray Williams Jr. The Mount Sinai
Medical Center Family Guide to
Dental Health. Macmillan Publishing
Company, 1991.
Kulacz, D.D.S., Robert, and Thomas E.
Levy, M.D., J.D. The Roots of
Disease: Connecting Dentistry &
Medicine. Xlibris, 2002.
Lee, McHenry, Joleen Jackson, and
Vicki J. Audette. I Hate Dentists!
The Feel Good Guide to Going to
the Dentist. IHD Publishing, 1999.
Marsoli, Lisa Ann. Things to Know
About Going to the Dentist. Silver
Burdett Company, 1984.
Ring, Malvin. Dentistry: An Illustrated
History. Harry N. Abrams Inc., 1992.
Taintor, Jerry F., and Mary Jane Taintor.
The Oral Report: The Consumer’s
Common Sense Guide to Better
Dental Care. Ballantine, 1989.
Ward, Brian R. Dental Care. Franklin
Watts, 1986.
Wynbrandt, James. The Excruciating
History of Dentistry: Toothsome Tales
and Oral Oddities From Babylon to
Braces. St. Martin’s Press, 2000.
Dentistry Resources


DENTISTRY 63
.Dentistry Resources
Organizations and Websites
Academy of Comprehensive Esthetics
www.ACEsthetics.com
Academy of General Dentistry
Toll-free telephone: 888-243-3368
www.agd.org
American Academy of
Cosmetic Dentistry
Toll-free telephone: 800-543-9220
www.aacd.com
American Academy of
Dental Sleep Medicine
www.aadsm.org
American Academy of Oral and
Maxillofacial Pathology
Toll-free telephone: 888-552-2667
www.aaomp.org
American Academy of Oral and
Maxillofacial Radiology
www.aaomr.org
American Academy of
Pediatric Dentistry
www.aapd.org
American Academy
of Periodontology
www.perio.org
American Association
of Endodontists
Toll-free telephone: 800-872-3636
www.aae.org
American Association of Oral
and Maxillofacial Surgeons
www.aaoms.org
American Association
of Orthodontists
www.braces.org
American Association of Public
Health Dentistry
www.aaphd.org
American College of Prosthodontists
www.prosthodontics.org
American Dental
Assistants Association
www.dentalassistant.org
American Dental Association
www.ada.org
American Dental
Education Association
www.adea.org
American Dental
Hygienists’ Association
www.adha.org
American Dental Society of
Anesthesiology
www.adsahome.org
American Society of Dentist
Anesthesiologists
www.asdahq.org
Dentalsite
www.dentalsite.com
HealthWeb
www.healthweb.org


64 DENTISTRY
Dentistry Resources.
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to Daniel L. Orr II, DDS, MS, PhD, JD,
MD, for serving as the Dentistry merit
badge pamphlet subject matter expert.
An Eagle Scout, Dr. Orr is a Professor
Emeritus of Anesthesiology and Oral &
Maxillofacial Surgery at the University
of Nevada Las Vegas School of Dental
Medicine.
We also appreciate the invaluable
participation of the following:
Cubmaster and UNLV Sports
Medicine team dentist James Callaway,
DDS; Eagle Scout pediatric dentist
Aaron Collins, DDS; Life Scout
orthodontist Dave Smith, DDS; Eagle
Scout general dentist Kent Smith, DDS;
Eagle Scout anesthesiologist Timothy
Orr, DMD; Eagle Scout periodontist
Aaron Rawlings, DMD; Eagle Scout
general dentist Trent Tobler, DMD
Scouts BSA is also thankful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
21st Century Dental, Irving, Texas,
courtesy—pages 15 (healthy and
unhealthy gums), 17 (mamelons),
23 (gum disease), 41
(radiograph), 45, 46 (gingivitis),
49–52, 57 (before and after
orthodontics), and 58 (before
and after prosthodontics)
21st Century Dental, Irving, Texas,
and Michael Roytek (photo
illustration)—page 40 (radiograph
and dentist with patient)
Dr. Trent Tobler, courtesy—page 6
German Medical History Museum,
courtesy—page 7
Library of Congress, Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
pages 4, 9 (dentist and patient),
and 53 (false teeth)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 8,
9 (dental tools)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Dan Bryant—pages 20, 38 (rotary
tools), 41 (Scouts with dentist), 42
(dental mold), and 43 (all)
John McDearmon—pages 11, 14
(illustrations), 16 (illustration),
19 (illustration), 21, 22 (illustration),
and 44