ELECTRICITY





ELECTRICITY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”





ELECTRICITY 3
35886
ISBN 978-0-8395-3408-2
©2026 Scouting America
2026 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to scouting.org/merit-badges/electricity
or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
Scan this QR code for the latest Electricity requirements.
Contents
What Is Electricity?............................................................... 5
Forms of Electricity............................................................... 9
Common Electrical Terms ................................................... 25
Current in Motion ...............................................................31
Responding to Electrical Emergencies ...................................61
Careers in Electricity............................................................71
Electricity Resources ........................................................... 74





ELECTRICITY 5
.What Is Electricity?
What Is Electricity?
Electricity is a powerful and fascinating force of nature. As
early as 600 B.C., observers of the physical world suspected
that electricity existed but did not have a name for it. In fact,
real progress in unraveling the mystery of electricity has come
only within the last 250 years. Important discoveries by scientists
such as Benjamin Franklin, who proved that lightning is a
tremendously powerful electrical spark, have given us a more
complete picture of what electricity is and how we can harness
its power.
To begin to understand electricity as an awesome force,
one must start with the basics. Electricity is a rapid transfer of
charged particles called electrons, which create levels of energy
depending upon how they transfer.
Atoms
All things are made of tiny particles called atoms. You are made
of atoms, and so are your friends, your clothes, the food you
eat, and the air you breathe. Atoms are so small that it takes
millions of them to form the period at the end of this sentence.
Every atom is made up of even tinier particles called
protons, neutrons, and electrons. Protons are positively charged,
and neutrons are neutral—they have no charge. Together,
protons and neutrons form the nucleus, or core, of an atom.
Electrons, which are negatively charged, speed around the
nucleus, orbiting it in layers called shells.
The positive charge of the protons in the nucleus equals the
total negative charge of the electrons in orbit. This makes the
atom neutral, or balanced. Protons and electrons have a natural
attraction to each other, which helps to keep the atom stable.
Much as the gravitational force of the sun holds planets in their
orbits, electrical forces hold electrons around the nucleus.
It is important to understand the atom’s structure
because the electrical charge of the electron is the basic unit
of electricity. The position and movement of positively and
The word
electricity comes
from electron,
the Greek word
for amber.


6 ELECTRICITY
What Is Electricity?.
negatively charged particles cause the electric and magnetic
effects you will be working on to earn your Electricity merit
badge.
Atom
NEUTRON
PROTON
ELECTRON
To picture the structure of an atom, think about the
arrangement of our solar system. Just as planets orbit
the sun, electrons move around the nucleus of an atom.


ELECTRICITY 7
.What Is Electricity?
When an atom loses one or more of its electrons, the
atom becomes positively charged, or out of balance.
If an atom gains free-moving electrons, it becomes
negatively charged, and also out of balance. Out-of-
balance atoms are called ions.
Ions and Balance
The bond that holds electrons in orbit is weakest in the atom’s
outermost shells. A free-moving electron can bump into and
knock electrons out of an atom’s outermost shell. These loose
electrons, in turn, can bump into still other atoms and dislodge
more electrons. Moving together, these freed electrons form
electric current.
Electrons are easily dislodged from, or rubbed off of,
an atom because they are lightweight and, in the outermost
shells, accessible. (Protons are heavy and do not rub off easily.)
Imagine electrons as grains of dust spinning swiftly around a
central core of iron. You can see why the lightweight, negatively
charged electrons are constantly rubbing off or being lifted by
nearby atoms and ions.
Outermost shell
HYDROGEN ATOM OXYGEN ATOM





ELECTRICITY 9
.Forms of Electricity
Forms of Electricity
Have you ever watched with wonder as lightning lit up the
night sky during a thunderstorm? Have you ever combed your
hair on a cold day and heard it crackle? Have you ever pulled
a clingy sock away from your T-shirt as it was removed from a
warm dryer? All these phenomena are examples of electricity.
Static Electricity
Try this experiment. Shuffle across a thick carpet on a dry day
and then lightly touch a doorknob. You will jump. You might
even see a spark. The crackling noises and sparks indicate the
presence of static electricity.
Static electricity is electricity transferred by rubbing objects
together. It can be stored on the surface of materials like rubber,
glass, cloth, and amber. The electrical charge builds up until it
discharges, or jumps. The sparks and crackling noises are static
electricity in motion.
Thales of Miletus (625–547 B.C.), an ancient Greek
philosopher, knew rubbing amber, or fossilized tree
resin, with a piece of wool or fur would make a small,
lightweight object like a feather fly up and cling to it.
Rubbing makes the amber electrically negative and
able to exert force over a distance, like a magnet. As
the charge is lost, the amber loses its attraction and
the feather floats back down.
While Thales did not completely understand the
force that attracted a feather to rubbed amber, he
recorded some of the first observations of magnetism
and electricity. The word electron comes from the
Greek word for amber.


10 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
When you comb your hair and produce static electricity,
loose electrons are rubbing off the hair atoms and clinging to
the atoms of the comb. Losing electrons leaves the hair atoms
positively charged; gaining extra electrons makes the comb
negatively charged. Because different (unlike) charges attract
each other, your hair tries to stick to the comb.
Rubbing, or friction, does not create static electricity; it
merely separates negative and positive charges and transfers
them onto different bodies, or onto different parts of the
same body.
When objects out of electrical balance approach each
other, a spark may jump from one to the other, which is what
happened when you shuffled across the carpet and touched the
doorknob. Electrons jumped from an object overcharged with
electrons to an object short of electrons.
Unlike charges attract; like charges repel, similar to the
way unlike poles of magnets attract while the like poles
repel. Try this experiment: Rub two inflated balloons
against your sweater and tie them to a stick with the
rubbed sides facing each other. Because both balloons
have the same charge they will swing away from, or
repel, one another.
A static charge is an accumulated electrical charge on
an object. It is capable of producing a spark that can
cause an explosion. For example, when filling the gas
tank of a car or boat, you must keep the pump nozzle
in constant contact with the fill pipe to prevent a static
charge (a spark) from igniting gas fumes.


ELECTRICITY 11
.Forms of Electricity
Lightning
Lightning is caused by static electricity. As positive and negative
charges become separated during a thunderstorm, they build
up in different parts of the clouds. Eventually, they jump the
gap between regions of opposite charge, discharging their
buildup. The discharge is lightning—a mighty stream of
electrons leaping through the sky. Some lightning bolts strike
the ground, but most jump from one part of a cloud to another.
Electrostatic Generators
Electrostatic generators, created in England by Francis Hauksbee
(1666–1713), generated significant amounts of electrical charge.
One such machine used the friction created from leather
pressing on a revolving glass cylinder to produce an electrical
charge, which in turn was transferred to a metal comb. The
electrical charge then traveled from the comb to an attached
metal ball, and then into a Leyden jar for storage.
Ben Franklin’s
original lightning
rod, above;
modern-day
lightning
rod, below
Ben Franklin’s Kite
After watching lightning jump from cloud to cloud
and from cloud to ground, American statesman and
scientist Benjamin Franklin (1706–1790) determined that
an electrical charge was like a fluid seeping through an
object, and that it could jump to another object, making
a spark. To prove his point, he tied a metal key to a kite
and flew it in a sky threatening a thunderstorm. The
electrical charge from lightning leapt to the key and
produced a spark of electricity. Franklin was lucky to
survive the risky experiment, but he proved
that lightning is a form of electricity. After
his experiment, he invented the
lightning rod, an iron rod that
would safely conduct lightning
from the top of a building to the
ground.


12 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
Magnetism
Electricity and magnetism, although they seem quite different,
are actually two forms of the same force. An electric current
produces magnetism. To put it another way, whenever electricity
moves, magnetism is produced. And whenever a magnetic force
field changes, electricity is produced.
Named for the university in the Netherlands
where it was invented, the Leyden jar was
the first storage container for electricity. The
charge could not pass through the glass so
it built up inside. If a metal rod was held
near the jar, the charge leapt from a metal
ball on top through a discharger to the
outer metal coating on the jar, causing a
spark.
Modern devices that store electrical
charge are called capacitors. They are found
inside many household appliances, from
washing machines to CD players. Though
most are the size of a dime, they generally follow the
same principle as a Leyden jar.
William Gilbert (1544–1603), a doctor to England’s royal
family, wrote about magnetism and electricity in 1600.
He was the first person to use the word “electric,” and
he invented what is believed to be the earliest electrical
instrument. The device had a pointer, which would
swing toward objects like straw and paper that carried
an electrical charge when rubbed. He named objects
that attracted the pointer “electrics,” and those that did
not “nonelectrics.”
Gilbert believed there were two types of electricity.
Glass rubbed with silk made what he called vitreous
electricity. Amber rubbed with fur made resinous
electricity. Gilbert showed that objects with the same
type of electricity repelled each other, while those
containing different kinds attracted each other.


ELECTRICITY 13
.Forms of Electricity
Electromagnetism
Italian Alessandro Volta (1745–1827) thought electricity came
only from contact between two metals; he called it metallic
electricity. He was not absolutely correct, either. But Volta did
invent the earliest electric cell, which became known as the vol-
taic pile. It used two different metals, separated by moist chemi-
cals, to produce a continuous transfer of electrical charge. When
the charge transferred along wires, the chemicals separated out
more electrical charge. By piling up lots of cells, Volta created
the first battery, with every set of cells producing slightly more
than 1 volt of electricity.
With Volta’s invention of the battery in 1800, scientists
finally had a source of steady electric current that could be
transferred. Twenty years later, Copenhagen researcher Hans
Christian Oersted (1777–1851) linked electricity and magnetism,
observing that a metal wire carrying electrical current affected
a magnetic compass needle. Instead of following Earth’s
north-south magnetic field, the needle aligned itself with the
electrified wire’s magnetic field. Oersted’s discovery that the
electric current had produced magnetism became known as
electromagnetism. This new scientific field would become the
springboard for development of the electric motor and the
electromagnet.
Making Connections
Inspired by Oersted’s discovery, André-Marie Ampère (1775–
1836), a Frenchman, set out to explain the connection between
electricity and magnetism. Ampère’s work led to a much
fuller understanding of the relationship between electricity and
Volt, the modern unit
of electric potential, is
the strength or electric
pressure of the transferring
charge. Today’s high-
voltage power lines
operate at 500,000 volts
or more while a modern
house circuit operates at
110 or 220 volts.


14 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
magnetism, which eventually led to important applications such
as the telegraph and electromagnet.
He found that when electricity passed through a metal wire
onto a card containing iron filings, and the card was tapped
lightly, the filings lined up in a circular pattern around the
magnetic field created by the electrified wire. When the electric
current was turned off, the filings again relaxed into their
random arrangement on the card.
THE AMPERE
With further experimentation, Ampère discovered that two
parallel electric currents running in the same direction attract
each other, and that parallel currents running in opposite
directions repel each other. The modern unit of current, the
ampere, was named in his honor.
Electromagnets
In 1825, William Sturgeon (1783–1850) wound a coil of wire
around an iron rod and built one of the first electromagnets.
It differed from a permanent magnet as its magnetism could
be switched on and off by electrical current.
Demonstrations of electricity’s properties were of great scientific
interest in the 18th and early 19th centuries.
Stephen Gray (1666–1736), a British scientist, figured
out that any object that touches an electrified object
will itself become electrified. This process—transferring
a charge from one substance to another—is known as
electrical conduction.


ELECTRICITY 15
.Forms of Electricity
Important Safety Notes
In your experiments, always use
batteries as the power source. Do NOT
use electricity from household circuits;
it is dangerous and can cause serious injury. Never work
on household circuits without first turning off the circuit
breaker, and always work on electricity with the help of
an electrician or an otherwise qualified adult.
Wires. To prepare insulated wires for experiments,
you must carefully strip some of the plastic coating
(insulation) from each end to expose the metal. Use
an electrician’s wire stripper, or gently cut the plastic
with a pocketknife. If you use stranded wire rather than
solid-core, twist the strands tightly clockwise.
Connections. Join wires and batteries together with
electrician’s tape, metal paper clips, alligator clips, or
mating crimp connectors. Make sure metal parts touch
tightly or your experiments will not work.


16 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
Make a Simple Electromagnet
This experiment shows that a wire carrying a current is
surrounded by an invisible magnetic field, or force, and it
illustrates how closely electricity and magnetism are related.
Step 1—Wrap a length of insulated (plastic-coated) wire about
20 times around a cardboard tube.
Step 2—Strip insulation at wire connections before connecting
the wire to a 4.5-volt or 6-volt battery and to a switch made
from a small block of wood, two thumbtacks and a paper clip.
You may use a switch bought at a store.
Step 3—Slide a small compass into the middle of the
cardboard tube.
Step 4—Swivel the paper clip against and away from one
thumbtack to switch the electric circuit on and off.
Step 5—Turn the compass around and retry. Does the compass
arrow go the same way? Why?
Watch what happens to the compass needle as you open
and close the circuit. When you close the circuit, the electric
current produces magnetism in the coil of wire. The magnetism
all around the wire makes the compass needle swing. When
the circuit is broken (you open the paper-clip switch), no
magnetism is produced so the needle again points north.
PLASTIC-COATED WIRE
PAPER CLIP IS TOUCHING
BOTH THUMBTACKS, SO
THIS CIRCUIT IS CLOSED.


ELECTRICITY 17
.Forms of Electricity
Magnet Earth
Did you know that you live on what is essentially a huge
magnet? Earth, like any magnet, has magnetic north and south
poles. What we call the magnetic north pole is located near
Bathurst Island, north of Hudson Bay in Canada—more than a
thousand miles south of the geographic North Pole. What we
commonly call the magnetic south pole is near the Adélie Coast
of Antarctica, about 1,600 miles from the geographic South Pole.
Natural and Artificial Magnets
Magnetic iron ore is found in different parts of Earth. This
magnetite, or lodestone, is one example of a natural magnet.
In the early Middle Ages, sailors learned that when a slender
piece of iron was rubbed on a chunk of magnetite, the iron
would become temporarily magnetized. If a piece of hard steel
is rubbed on lodestone, the steel will remain magnetized for a
long time, becoming a permanent artificial magnet.
Magnetic Attraction and Repulsion
One end of a magnet is its south pole; the other end, its north
pole. If you hang a magnet on a string, one end will always
point north. You can use a hanging magnet to demonstrate the
law of attraction and repulsion. Bring the north pole of another
magnet toward the north pole of a magnet on a string. The
hanging magnet will spin around until its south pole meets the
north pole of the magnet in your hand. Like poles repel each
other. Unlike poles attract.
Because of
changes in Earth’s
magnetic field, the
magnetic poles
are not specific
locations but
general areas.
Studies over a
period of many
years show that
the magnetic
poles change
location with time.
Magnets are either permanent or temporary.
Permanent magnets are made of hard steel and
retain their magnetic effect for a long time. Temporary
magnets are made of soft iron or a soft grade of steel
and retain their magnetism only when they are in
contact with another magnet or are being energized by
an electric current.


18 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
The Magnetic Field
In the floating needle experiment, you found what seemed like
an invisible circle of power around the needle. To actually see
this magnetic field, wedge a horseshoe magnet between some
books, with the poles facing upward. Balance a card or a piece
of stiff paper on top of the magnet, and sprinkle iron filings
on the card. Gently tap the card or paper and the filings will
arrange themselves in circular forms with a pattern of lines
running from pole to pole.
When you cut
off the electric
current from an
electromagnet,
it is no longer
magnetized. An
electromagnet
with a metal
core is what
operates door-
bells, buzzers, CD
player speakers,
and telegraph
instruments.
Iron filings can be purchased at a hobby
store. Be careful not to breathe or swallow
any of them.
Try this experiment: Stick a magne-
tized needle through a small cork,
then float it in a saucer of water.
Hold another magnet over the float-
ing needle and notice how you can
control it, through attraction and
repulsion, by turning the magnet in
your hand.
Iron filings scattered on an index card
or stiff paper and held over a horseshoe
magnet will arrange themselves
like this. The lines are called lines of
magnetic force.


ELECTRICITY 19
.Forms of Electricity
Make an Electromagnet
Now you are ready to make an electromagnet, a magnet
activated by the transfer of electricity.
Step 1—Coil a length of insulated wire at least 20 turns around
a large metal bolt or nail. The more turns of wire around the
bolt or nail, the stronger the magnet. Use electrician’s tape as
needed to hold the coils of wire in place.
Step 2—Strip insulation at wire connections before connecting
the wire ends to the terminals of a 4.5-volt or 6-volt battery.
The electric current will produce a magnetic field, as you know
from your experiment with the compass and the cardboard
tube. The bolt or nail, now called the core, will become an
electromagnet.
Test your electromagnet by
using it to pick up metallic paper
clips or pins. Try it first with the
wire ends connected to the battery,
then disconnect the battery. See
if the bolt or nail will still pick
up paper clips or pins. Warning:
Leaving both wire ends connected
to the battery will drain the battery
and the magnet will stop working.
The word circuit
refers to the path
an electric current
travels, from the
source of the
power, such as a
battery, through
some device using
electricity, such
as a lightbulb, and
back to the source.
If the circuit is
opened, or there
is no path back
to the power
source, electrons
will not transfer.


20 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
Current Electricity
Current electricity is electricity in motion—the current that runs
through a wire and rings a bell or lights a light. What makes
the current move? How fast does it travel? In what direction
does it go?
Potential Difference
Every object charged with electricity has a certain potential or
electromotive force. When two objects with different potentials
are connected with a wire, electrons move from where there
are many to where there are few. This is how the transfer
of electrons takes place. This potential difference between
electromotive forces causes the electrons to travel along the
wire attempting to equalize the two potentials until the circuit
is opened.
A simple circuit
BULB
BATTERY
POSITIVE
TERMINAL
NEGATIVE
TERMINAL
BULB
BATTERY
An incomplete circuit
Electric Batteries
A potential difference exists in electric batteries.
In a dry-type battery, like those used in flashlights,
the battery’s outer edge, or “can,” is usually made of
zinc, which is negatively charged. A carbon rod in
the middle of the battery is positively charged. If you
connect the zinc to the carbon with wiring attached to
the battery terminals and a device such as a lamp that
will use the transfer of current, then the electrons in
the zinc will move through the wire and lightbulb into
the carbon rod, thus converting chemical energy into
electrical energy.


ELECTRICITY 21
.Forms of Electricity
TERMINALS
SEALANT
EXPANSION
SPACE
PASTE
POROUS PAPER
CARDBOARD
ZINC
CARBON
Dry Batteries
The most common dry-cell batteries are either lithium, alkaline,
or nicad. Common battery sizes include AA, AAA, C, D,
and 9V. These batteries can be either non-rechargeable or
rechargeable. Dry cells can be stored for up to a decade before
being used if stored in the proper conditions. Dry-cell batteries
are portable and are used in a wide arrange of electronic
devices including remote controls, flashlights, toys, portable
electronic devices, cellphones, PC’s, and even safety devices like
smoke detectors.
Designed for on-and-off use, dry batteries wear down
quickly if they are used continuously. Some specially designed
batteries can be recharged by passing an electric current through
the cells. Not all dry batteries can be recharged, though. A fire
or explosion could occur if you attempt to recharge the wrong
type of battery.
A dry cell is designed for on-and-off use.


22 ELECTRICITY
Forms of Electricity.
Wet Batteries
Wet-storage cells, such as a car battery, should not be used too
long without being recharged. If a car radio or headlights are left
on all night, you may find the battery dead the next morning.
The voltage and the water supply in unsealed wet batteries
should be checked regularly and the area around the terminals
kept clean. Most modern car batteries are sealed and require
no maintenance, but true wet batteries can indeed dry out. Top
them off to the fill line with distilled water.
A new type of sealed battery is the gelled electrolyte or “gel
cell” battery, which provides a lot of current for its size, is easy
to recharge, and is relatively inexpensive. Gel cells are found
most often in emergency lighting systems in schools and stores.


ELECTRICITY 23
.Forms of Electricity
Useful Electricity
Often, electricity is useful to people when it makes up a
circuit. An electric circuit contains:
1. a source of electric energy, like a battery or a
generating plant,
2. a load, where the electricity is converted to a useful
form of energy like a lamp, a motor, or a heater, and
3. a pair of wires in a cable (home) or overhead/
underground wires (transmission/distribution systems),
to carry the electric energy from the source to the load.
This useful electricity circulates through the cable in the
circuits located in homes, in opposite directions, where
each of the two wires are insulated from each other
with either plastic or rubber coating over copper wire.


24 ELECTRICITY
Common Electrical Terms.


ELECTRICITY 25
.Common Electrical Terms
Common
Electrical Terms
To work with electricity, you need to know some common
terms for using and measuring it. Several important terms
are defined below.
alternating current. Current that regularly reverses direction,
traveling first in one direction and then in the opposite direction.
Power companies generate alternating current to make it easier
to transmit electricity over long distances. Abbreviated AC.
ammeter. An instrument for measuring current in amperes.
ampere. A unit measuring the strength of an electrical current,
based on the number of electrons transferring past a given
point per second. Many elements of a wiring system are rated in
amperes for the greatest amount of current they can safely carry.
The ampere, abbreviated amp, is named for French physicist
André-Marie Ampère.
circuit. A loop-shaped path through which electric current
travels from the source through some device using electricity,
such as a lightbulb, and back to the source.
circuit breaker. A safety switch installed in
a circuit to break the transfer of electricity when the current
exceeds a set amount. Circuit breakers can be reset once
“tripped.” See also fuse.
conductor. A substance or device through which electricity
passes. Most metals are good conductors of electricity—that
is, they allow electricity to travel through them with little
resistance. Gold and silver are the best conductors of electricity
but are too expensive for general use. Copper, which is
relatively cheap and plentiful, is used most often, especially in
transmission lines that carry electricity from power plants to
homes, schools, and businesses. Devices that run on electricity
have copper or aluminum wiring. Aluminum is not as good a


26 ELECTRICITY
Common Electrical Terms.
conductor as copper, but because it is cheaper and lighter, it is
also frequently used.
current. The transfer of electricity in one direction.
cycle. One complete reversal of alternating current; a forward
current and backward current. Ordinary household current
experiences 60 cycles per second (60 hertz).
direct current. An electric current of constant direction—
that is, the transfer of electrons goes only in one direction.
Abbreviated DC.
fuse. A safety device installed in a circuit to prevent an
overload. Designed to melt or “blow” when current exceeds
a set amount, it opens the circuit and stops the transfer of
electricity. Fuses cannot be reused once blown. See also circuit
breaker.
galvanometer. A device that detects and determines the
strength of electrical currents.
ground. To connect any part of an electrical wiring system
to the ground or to another conducting body, such as a metal
water pipe or a metal rod driven into the earth.
grounding wire. Conductor that grounds a metal component
but does not carry current during normal operation. A ground
wire ensures that an appliance surface is free of electrical
charge to prevent electric shock.


ELECTRICITY 27
.Common Electrical Terms
hertz. A unit of frequency equal to one cycle per second.
Abbreviated Hz.
hot wire. Ungrounded conductor carrying electrical current.
Usually identified by black or red insulation.
insulation. Covering of nonconducting material used on wires.
insulator. A material that does not conduct electricity, such as
rubber or plastic.
kilowatt. Unit of electrical power equal to 1,000 watts.
Abbreviated kW.
kilowatt-hour. Unit of energy used for metering and selling
electricity. One kilowatt-hour equals 1,000 watts used for one
hour (or any equivalent, such as 500 watts used for two hours).
Abbreviated kWh.
load. The part of an electrical circuit that uses the electric
power. In a lighting circuit, the load is the lightbulb.
neutral wire. Grounded conductor that completes a circuit
by providing a return path to the source. Always identified by
either white or gray insulation.
ohm. A unit of measurement for electrical resistance to a
current. It is named for German physicist Georg Simon Ohm
(1787–1854), whose Ohm’s law states that the pressure of
one volt will cause a current of one ampere to flow through a
resistance of one ohm (Voltage = Current × Resistance). This
simple formula shows the relationship between volts, amperes,
and resistance in any electric circuit. Abbreviated Ω.


28 ELECTRICITY
Common Electrical Terms.
outlet. An electrical device that provides access to electrical
power for plugging in appliances or equipment.
overload. Condition in which an electrical circuit carries more
current than it can safely handle.
receptacle. The device that you plug electric cords into,
sometimes called an outlet.
resistance. The opposition against the free transfer of electrons
in a conductor. Measured in ohms.
resistor. A device designed to restrict the transfer of current in
(or introduce resistance into) an electric circuit.
rheostat. A resistor built so that the current traveling through
the circuit can be adjusted at will.
short circuit. A completed, low-resistance circuit that allows
electrons to follow a shorter, unintended path back to the
power source rather than follow the longer path that goes
through the load. Occurs when bare wires touch each other;
often results from worn insulation.
source. Point of supply, such as a home outlet, generator, or
battery.
switch. Device to break the transfer of electricity. When the
switch is on, the circuit is closed and current may travel through
it. When the switch is off, the circuit is open and electricity
cannot transfer.
volt. A unit of potential difference, or a unit of measurement of
electrical pressure or force. Abbreviated V.
Too many cords are plugged into this outlet.


ELECTRICITY 29
.Common Electrical Terms
voltage. Pressure at which a circuit operates, expressed in
volts. Voltage is like the pressure in a water pipe. For example,
120 volts have twice the pushing force of 60 volts.
voltmeter. An instrument for measuring the difference in
electric potential (electrical pressure) between two points.
watt. Unit that measures electrical power at the point where
it is used in a circuit. One watt of power equals one volt of
pressure times one ampere of current. Many electrical devices
are rated in watts according to the power they consume.
Abbreviated W.





ELECTRICITY 31
.Current in Motion
Current in Motion
Electricity is like an army division. Sitting still, it accomplishes
nothing. To get work done, the division must start moving.
Electricity marching along a wire is a valuable servant. We can
generate it, send it over wires for great distances, and control it.
Alternating and Direct Current
There are two kinds of electric current—direct current (DC)
and alternating current (AC). Direct current is like a one-
way street—the electrons go in only one direction. Turn on a
flashlight and direct current travels. Car batteries also produce
direct current.
In alternating current, the transfer of electrons starts from
zero and builds to a peak in the positive direction, then subsides
back down to zero. Then the transfer of electrons reverses,
building to a negative peak and subsiding back to zero. In
this way, electrons alternately travel in positive and negative
directions, continuously repeating until the circuit is opened.
Large generators in power plants commonly produce
alternating current for use in homes and factories. Most
household and industrial power circuits in the United States
have alternating currents with a frequency of 60 cycles per
second, or 60 hertz (Hz). This means that the current alternates
back and forth, making a round-trip, or cycle, 60 times per
second. To make 60 round-trips, the current changes direction
120 times. Power systems in some other countries operate on
a frequency other than 60 Hz. Some appliances depend on the
frequency of the alternating current and will not work properly
in countries with different frequency electricity.
Using Alternating Current
Power companies prefer alternating current because it is readily
produced by large generators, and it is easy to step its voltage
up or down. By passing it through simple transformers, operators
can easily raise or lower the voltage of alternating current.
Power line
voltages are
extremely
dangerous. If you
see a downed
power line, do not
approach or
touch it. Contact
local authorities
and the local
power company
immediately.


32 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Transformers
do not affect
the power; they
merely raise or
lower the voltage
and current.
When stepped up to a higher voltage, alternating current
is easy to transport over long wires. When it arrives at its
destination, it is stepped down to moderate voltages. Alternating
current readily operates lights, motors, and electrical appliances.
Generators in most electric power plants operate at 13,800
volts or higher. Voltage is passed through transformers that step
up the voltage to 34,500 volts or higher. Transmission voltages
typically are 115,000, 138,000, and 230,000 volts (called high
voltage or HV), and 345,000, 500,000, and 765,000 volts (called
extra high voltage or EHV).
An electric grid is comprised of various sources that create
electricity, which flows between the plants and transmission
grid lines (EHV and HV). This electrical energy is transferred
between the transmission and distribution grids to customers.


ELECTRICITY 33
.Current in Motion
If mishandled, the electrical current in
your house can be dangerous. Do not
tamper with power lines. The result could
be a fuse blowout, tripped circuit breaker,
fire, serious injury, or even death.
Transformers
You can raise or lower alternating current voltages by using a
transformer. As you raise the voltage, you lower the current in a
circuit. As you lower the voltage, you raise the current.
A transformer consists of a round or square iron core.
Insulated wire wound around one side of the core is called the
primary coil. Wire is also wound around the other side, but with
a different number of turns. This is called the secondary coil.
The voltage change is determined by the turns ratio of wires on
the input side verses the output side of the transformer.
Alternating current is put through the primary coil, which
induces another alternating current in the secondary coil. If the
secondary coil has more turns than the primary coil, the voltage
is stepped up. If the secondary coil has fewer turns than the
primary coil, the voltage is stepped down.


34 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Lightning rods are
grounded. Can
you explain why?
Here’s a definition of voltage classes provided by the
American National Standards Institute.
Low voltage. A class of nominal system voltages less than
1,000 volts
Medium voltage. Voltages equal to or greater than 1,000
and less than 100,000 volts
High voltage. Voltages from 100,000 to 230,000 volts
Extra-high voltage. Voltages from 230,000 to less than
1,000,000 volts
A transformer basically consists of an iron core and two
pieces of wire wound around it. To double the voltage,put
twice as manywindings on one side as on the other. To cut
voltage in half, reverse the connections.
COMING OUT
240 VOLTS
1 AMP
240 WATTS
GOING IN
240 VOLTS
1 AMP
240 WATTS
COMING OUT
120 VOLTS
2 AMPS
240 WATTS
GOING IN
120 VOLTS
2 AMPS
240 WATTS
Long-Distance Electricity Transmission
Electricity often moves energy across long distances. Electricity
sources such as power plants may be built in remote locations
like dammed rivers, wind farms, or natural gas fields. The
electricity will generally be used where large groups of people
are, like cities.
Usually, electricity is moved over these distances using
overhead power transmission lines. These transmission lines
are tall metal towers from which aluminum conductors hang.
The conductors are supported with glass or ceramic insulators.


ELECTRICITY 35
.Current in Motion
Power lines are tall and often take advantage of straight
courses over many miles. The conductors are separated by
many feet, because the potential difference, or voltage, is
hundreds of thousands of volts.
The high voltage is used because it allows the
corresponding current flowing in the conductors to be
correspondingly low. In a transmission line, if the voltage
is doubled, the current can be halved. This corresponding
reduction in current allows the conductors to be thinner,
lighter in weight, and cheaper. You can think of “high voltage”
transmission lines as actually being “low-current” transmission
lines.
Using Direct Current
While most current produced by large generators is alternating
current, direct current can be produced for special needs.
Alternating current can be changed to direct current by putting
it through a rectifier. You probably have noticed that many
small appliances and electronic devices have little black boxes
that plug into wall sockets. The black boxes contain voltage
transformers and, usually, rectifiers for changing house current
(AC) to direct current (DC).
Cars use direct current, as do radios and television sets.
Radios and TVs have diodes that act as rectifiers to change
the alternating current in your house to the direct current
Check Your Appliances
Before connecting new
appliances or motors, read
the metal plate, known as the
name plate, that shows what
kind of current to use. Some
motors and appliances may
be wired for direct current
or take a voltage higher or lower than the one available.
Motors wired for one kind of current can be ruined by
connecting them to a different type of current. However,
some small motors are wired for both direct and
alternating current and are so marked.


36 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
they require. Other uses for direct current include flashlights;
electroplating; and charging batteries, cellphones, remotes, and
laptops.
Insulators, Conductors, and Grounds
You know that conductors are materials that allow electricity
to travel easily through them. Insulators are substances like
glass, porcelain, plastic, and rubber that have high resistance
and do not carry ordinary current. You have seen rubber or
plastic insulation on wires attached to electronic devices and
household appliances. Porcelain and polymer insulators are
used on high-tension wires to keep the current from getting out
of line or running into the ground.
To ground an electrical system means to provide an
electrical path to the earth. Grounding assures that all metal
parts of a circuit that you might touch stay at zero voltage
because they are connected directly to the earth. In a car, the
metal frame is the ground. Wires connected to it are considered
grounded. The outer parts of the spark plugs are grounded to
the engine. One pole of a car battery is grounded to the frame.
High-tension wires have elaborate grounding systems in case
lightning strikes them, which often happens.
It is crucial to realize that electricity will travel in
conductors other than wires. It can travel through any
conducting body—including a human body like your own.
Make sure electricity does not use you as a conductor on its
way to the ground. Water is a good conductor of electricity, so
never turn on a light, a radio, or an appliance such as a hair
dryer while standing in water—not even on a damp floor.
NEVER work on any live electrical circuit,
fixture, or appliance. The shock could kill you.


ELECTRICITY 37
.Current in Motion
Electric Motors
Generators and motors are devices that demonstrate the
changing of energy between mechanical and electrical.
Generators, like portable gasoline generators, take mechanical
motion and transfer it to electrical energy, while motors convert
electrical input to mechanical motion like turning a fan.
How an Electric Motor Works
A simple electric motor is little more than a spinning magnet.
From your earlier work with magnets, you will remember that
a movable magnet, such as a magnet on a string, swings around
because its north pole is repelled and its south pole is attracted
by the north pole of a nearby fixed magnet. It will stop turning
when its south pole is nearest the north pole of the fixed magnet.
Now, suppose that just as the south pole of the movable
magnet nears the north pole of the fixed magnet, we could
somehow reverse its magnetic poles. Then it would keep moving
for another half turn. If we could change its poles every half
turn, the moving magnet would spin around and around.
We cannot reverse the magnet’s poles, but we can achieve
the same results. In place of a movable bar magnet, we can use
a coil of wire wrapped around a core—an electromagnet—that
spins. Like a bar magnet, it has north and south poles, but
its poles can be instantly changed by reversing the current in
the wire. Every time the circuit is opened and closed (once
every half turn), the current reverses its direction. This is done
automatically as the coil of wire spins around.
Fields, Armatures, and Commutators
Substitute another electromagnet for the fixed bar magnet,
shaped to fit around the spinning coil, and you have a simple
direct-current motor. The fixed electromagnet is called the
field. The spinning electromagnet is called the armature.
The arrangement for opening and closing the circuit is the
commutator.


38 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Make a Motor
You can build a motor by following these steps.
INSTRUCTIONS
Step 1—With a screwdriver, attach the L brackets to the wood
base. Be sure the brackets are spaced far apart enough to allow
room for the dowel to fit through the two holes at the top, and
for the cork-dowel assembly to spin freely. About 1 inch of the
dowel should reach past each support.
Materials Needed
 Screwdriver
 Wood base
(about 12-by-4-by-1/2
inches)
 Four small screws
 Two metal L brackets
(about 1 1/2-by-1 1/2-by-
1/2 inches)
 Hammer and nail
 Piece of cork (3 to 4 inches
long)
 Two pieces of thin
insulated copper wire (bell
wire)
 Sturdy, thin
wooden or plastic dowel
(about 10 inches long)
 Electrical tape
 Battery (C, 6V,
or 9V)
 Rubber band
 Four to six small stick
magnets
 Wire stripper


ELECTRICITY 39
.Current in Motion
Step 2—Use the hammer and nail to punch a hole in the cork
crosswise, as shown. Be sure the hole is large enough for the
dowel and wire to pass through. With the cork in place, the
dowel must be clear of the wood base and be able to turn
freely in its support.
MAGNETS
WRAP WIRE
ONCE AROUND SCREWS
WRAP WIRE AROUND BOTH ENDS OF
BATTERY, RUBBER BAND HOLDS WIRES
IN PLACE
POSITION ENDS TO
CONNECT WITH MOUNTED
WIRES ON DOWEL ON
BOTH SIDES
TAPE
HOLE
WIRE WRAPPED
AROUND CORKHOLE
STRIPPED WIRE
STRIPPED WIRE
Step 3—Cut a piece of the insulated wire about 60 inches long,
and wrap it around the cork about 15 to 20 times. Do not cover
the holes in the cork or cut the wire—use one continuous length
of wire. (The more wraps there are, the “stronger” the motor will
be.) Leave several inches for leads on each end of the wire, and
pass both ends through the hole in the cork.


40 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Step 4—Using the wire stripper, remove about a half-inch of
insulation from both ends of the wire. Insert the dowel in the
cork. Tape the leads of the wire to opposite sides of the dowel,
as shown. Do not let the stripped ends touch each other or
cover them with tape.
Step 5—Screw two more screws into the wood base, as shown,
but leave enough space between the screw and base to wrap
wire around it once. Cut a piece of wire about 12 inches long.
Remove about a half-inch of insulation from both ends of the
wire. Wrap the wire across the top and bottom of a C battery,
as shown, and secure in place using a rubber band. Then wrap
each end of the wire once around the screws, and position the
ends against the dowel, on opposite sides, so that the ends
connect with the bare wire mounted on the dowel.
Step 6—Position the magnets as shown, close to the
connections. Give the dowel a spin with your fingers. The
motor should spin on its own. If it doesn’t work, you may need
to move the magnets slightly back and forth to find the “sweet”
spot. Then try again, moving the magnets slightly back and
forth, up and down, until the motor starts spinning.
Keep extra
fuses handy.


ELECTRICITY 41
.Current in Motion
When a fuse
blows or a circuit
breaker opens a
line because of
excessive current,
you must first
correct the cause
of the problem.
Then replace the
fuse or reset the
circuit breaker.
Rheostat
A rheostat is a simple device used to control the electrical current
in a circuit by inserting a length of high-resistance wire or other
resistive material. The resistance of a rheostat is measured in
ohms and determined by the size and length of the resistive wire.
Rheostats are used as volume controls in radios and television
sets. They can also be used for temperature regulation in heaters
and speed regulation in motors.
Make a Rheostat
You can make your own rheostat by following these instructions.
SPIN DOWEL
CONNECTORS
6V
BATTERY
If you are using a 6V battery, connect the wires to the terminals,
as shown here. The same concept applies for a 9V battery, but
you will need to use a rubber band to secure the wire to the bat-
tery for a good connection.
It is important to remember three rules about
resistance:
• A thin wire offers more resistance than a thick one. Just
as it is harder to force water through a small pipe than
through a big pipe, it is more difficult for electricity to
travel through a small wire than a larger one.
• A long wire offers more resistance than a short one,
just as a long pipe slows the flow of water.
• Electricity tends to seek the path of least resistance.


42 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
INSTRUCTIONS
Materials Needed
 Flashlight battery
 Flashlight bulb
 Full length of pencil lead from a mechanical pencil
 Thin copper wire
 Transparent tape
Pencil lead makes a good rheostat because it is not a
good conductor of electricity. The greater the distance
between the battery and the bulb, the weaker the
current becomes. A rheostat is a variable resistor used
to control current.
Step 1—Attach the wire to the top of the battery.
Step 2—Twist the other end of the wire around the metal side
of the lightbulb.


ELECTRICITY 43
.Current in Motion
Step 3—Holding the lightbulb by its glass end, touch the metal
bottom of the bulb to the lead close to the battery as shown.
The bulb will burn brightly.
Step 4—Gradually slide the bulb down the length of the lead.
The bulb will slowly grow dimmer as it is moved away from
the battery.


44 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Fuses and Circuit Breakers
Electric current comes into your home
on overhead or underground wires.
From your electrical meter, heavy,
well-insulated wires run to a main
distribution center or breaker box,
where the main disconnect switch is
located. If necessary, you can use that switch to shut off all
electric current in your house.
The fuse box or circuit breaker panel is typically located
in a utility room, in an electric room, in a mechanical room,
or near the main power feed to the building. Fuses and circuit
breakers act as guards: They prevent currents that are too
strong from traveling into your home’s branch circuits. If the
transfer of electricity becomes greater than a fuse is designed
to handle, the metal element inside the fuse melts and the fuse
blows, or burns out. A circuit breaker automatically opens and
“trips” the circuit.
Every time you switch on another light or appliance, more
current travels through that branch circuit. The wire is heavy
enough to carry amperes for normal use. If there are too many
amperes, the wires may get hot and start a fire unless a fuse or
circuit breaker protects the line.
If a fuse is designed to carry up to 15 amperes, for example,
and you try to consume 25 amperes from that line, the fuse
blows, the lights go out, and you know you have overloaded
the circuit. First, correct the problem so you will not overload
the circuit again. If you have too many appliances plugged into
one outlet or one circuit, unplug them. Toasters, coffee makers,
irons, and heaters can use a lot of current. They frequently are
the culprits.


ELECTRICITY 45
.Current in Motion
Dos
• Employ professional, licensed
electricians for major electrical work.
• Promptly replace worn cords and
defective plugs.
• Open the main disconnect before replacing fuses.
• Keep electrical cords where people won’t trip
over them.
Don’ts
• Don’t plug in too many appliances or devices into
one outlet or one circuit. The overload may blow a
fuse, trip a circuit breaker, or start a fire.
• Don’t pull out cords by the wire. Take firm hold of
the plug instead.
• Never touch electrical devices while in the tub
or while touching faucets, water pipes, or radiators.
• Don’t let Christmas tree lights touch the needles
of the tree.
• Never leave Christmas tree lights burning if
you’re not home.
• Never work on any live electrical circuit, fixture,
or appliance.
• Don’t replace a blown fuse with one that has a
higher ampere rating.
• Never stand on a damp floor when replacing fuses
or handling electrical devices.
• Don’t operate fans or heaters where small children
can reach them, and don’t leave these appliances
running unattended.


46 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Short Circuits
One common cause for a blown fuse or tripped circuit breaker
is a defective or frayed cord. Insulation wears off and the bare
wires short-circuit. A flash of light and a smell of burning
insulation indicate a short circuit. In a short circuit, electrons
can follow a shorter, unintended path back to the power source
rather than the longer path that goes through the appliance
or other device using electricity. Since the current suddenly
encounters lower resistance, more current transfers, and that
blows a fuse or trips the circuit breaker.
Some circuit breakers used in homes are the push-push
type; others have a handle that must be pushed to the off
position before the breaker can be reset to the on position.
Follow the instructions on your home’s circuit breaker panel
to properly reset whatever type you have.
Fuse Boxes
Fuse boxes have not been used in home or business
construction for many years. However, you might encounter
a fuse box in an older building. In a fuse box, there will be
several fuses. Before you replace one, open the main disconnect
for safety. The blown fuse probably will look black or show a
gap. Unscrew the burned one and replace it. If you can’t tell
which fuse is blown, check each one. Each fuse is marked
to show how many amperes it will carry. Never use a fuse of
higher amperage than the one you take out—it could start a fire.
Series and Parallel Circuits
In a series circuit, electric current travels along a single path,
going through each component or device. If one component is
removed or fails (as when a series-wired Christmas tree bulb
burns out), the circuit is broken and electric
current stops.
In a parallel circuit, each component or device is connected
to the power source on its own branch of the main circuit. Even
Damp floors can be a shock hazard. If a
room in your home has a damp floor,
power should be disconnected and the
problem fixed before returning electric
power to the room.


ELECTRICITY 47
.Current in Motion
if one bulb in a parallel
circuit burns out or is
removed, the other bulbs
continue to work because
each has its own complete
circuit. The wiring in
a house is arranged on
parallel circuits. If you
switch off one device, the
others still work.
Switches
A single-pole, single-throw switch is commonly used to turn
on electric lights and many other devices. It also is one of the
easiest electrical items you can make for a home experiment.
It is simply a strip of metal that swings, making contact with
a round-headed screw. A metal washer at the fixed end of the
switch is suggested.
Electric Bell
For part of requirement 5, you will need to draw a simple
electric bell to show how it works. Look at the drawing of the
electric bell on the following page.
Stairways often have lights that can be controlled by
switches at both the top and bottom of the stairs. This
requires a single-pole, double-throw—or three-way—
switch in each position.


48 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
First, follow the path the current takes. When you
push the button, the current goes through terminal A to the
electromagnet F. From there it goes to a moving contact, C,
then to contact post D, and out terminal E.
How does the current cause the bell to ring? As you push
the button, the electromagnet F attracts a small piece of iron
(the armature), B. Attached to the armature are contact C and
a hammer, H. The hammer hits the gong. As the armature is
pulled to the magnet, it pulls the contact away from post D and
the current stops—the circuit is broken. Thus, the electromagnet
loses its power and the spring G snaps the armature and contact
C back to post D. As contact C touches the post, the current
starts transferring again and the entire process is repeated. This
will happen several hundred times per minute, creating the
sound of a ringing bell or vibrating gong.
A watt is a unit
of power that
measures
electrical power
flowing through
a circuit. It was
named for James
Watt (1736–1819),
a Scottish
inventor who
perfected the
steam engine.
An electric vibrating bell. A and E are terminals. B is the iron
armature, C the moving contact, D the contact post, F the
electromagnet, G the return spring, and H the hammer.
BUTTON
GONG OR
BELL
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H


ELECTRICITY 49
.Current in Motion
When a pointer on
any of the meter
dials is between
two figures,
always note the
smaller number.
If you are not
sure a pointer has
passed a figure,
see if the pointer
to the right has
passed zero.
Electrical Safety
Inspection
For requirement 2, you will need to
complete an electrical safety inspection of your home.
Here are some items you can check in your home
today to ensure electrical safety. These tips come from
the Electrical Safety Foundation International and can
be found at esfi.org.
Make an electrical safety checklist and walk
through each room of your house, checking on each
aspect of electrical safety. You can go over your list
with your counselor later and discuss what you found.
Outlets. Check for outlets that have loose-fitting plugs,
which can overheat and lead to fire. Have an adult
replace any missing or broken wall plates. Make sure
there are safety covers over unused outlets that are
accessible to children.
Cords. Make sure cords are in good condition and not
frayed or cracked. Make sure they are
placed out of traffic areas where people
can trip over them or small children
can reach them. Cords should never be
nailed or stapled to the wall, baseboard,
or another object. Do not place cords
under carpets or rugs or put furniture on top of them.
Extension Cords. Check to see that cords are not
overloaded. Extension cords should be used on a
temporary basis; they are not intended as permanent
household wiring. Make sure extension cords have
safety closures to help prevent small children from
electrical burns on their mouths and other injuries.


50 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Plugs. Make sure your plugs fit your outlets. Never
remove the ground pin (the third prong) or try to make
a three-prong plug fit into a two-conductor outlet. This
could lead to an electrical fire. Never force a plug into
an outlet if it does not fit. Plugs should fit securely
into outlets. Avoid overloading outlets with too many
appliances.
Lightbulbs. Check the wattage of
all lightbulbs in light fixtures to
make sure they are the correct
wattage for the rating of the
fixture and any interconnecting
wires. Replace bulbs that
have a higher wattage than
recommended. If you do not know the correct size,
check with the manufacturer of the device. Make
sure bulbs are screwed in securely; loose bulbs can
overheat.
Ground Fault Circuit Interrupters (GFCIs). GFCIs can
help prevent electrocution. They should be used
in any area where water and electricity may come
into contact. When a GFCI senses current leakage, it
assumes a ground fault has occurred. It then interrupts
power fast enough to reduce the chance of serious
injury from electrical shock. Test GFCIs frequently
according to the manufacturer’s instructions and
after major electrical storms to make sure they work
properly.
Circuit Breakers/Fuses. Circuit breakers and fuses
should have the correct size current rating for the
circuit wiring, intended purpose, and the appliances/
devices connected to it. The correct rating for each
appliance or device is usually provided on its
Underwriters
Laboratories
Inc. (UL) is an
independent, not-
for-profit product
safety testing
and certification
organization.
A UL label or
stamp (above)
means that the
product meets
nationally
recognized safety
standards. Look
for this label
when purchasing
any electrical
products.


ELECTRICITY 51
.Current in Motion
nameplate. For example, a television has a nameplate
on the back with its volts, amps and/or watts ratings;
or a light bulb has similar data stamped or embossed
on it. If you do not know the correct rating, have an
electrician identify and label the rating to be used.
Always replace a fuse or circuit breaker with one of the
same rating. Make sure everyone in your family knows
where the main breaker is located and how to shut off
power to your entire house in case of emergency (via
the main circuit breaker).
Plug-In Appliances. Check to make
sure plug-in appliances such as
hair dryers are not left plugged
in where they can come into
contact with water. If a plug-in appliance
falls into water, NEVER reach in to pull it
out, even if it is turned off. First, turn off the
power source at the fuse box or breaker panel,
and then unplug the appliance. If you have an
appliance that has gotten wet, do not use it until it has
been checked by a qualified repair person.
Appliances. If any appliance repeatedly blows a fuse or
trips a circuit breaker, or if it has given you an electric
shock, unplug it and have it repaired or replaced.
Entertainment/Computer Equipment. Check to see
that the equipment is in good condition and working
properly. Look for cracks or damage in wiring, plugs,
and connectors. Always use a surge protector bearing
the seal of a nationally recognized certification agency
to protect your electronic devices from unexpected
overvoltage surges from the utility feeder or lightning
strikes that could otherwise cause damage.


52 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Outdoor Safety. Electric lawn mowers and electric power
tools with electric cords should not be used in rain, on
wet grass, or in wet conditions. Inspect power tools and
electric lawn mowers before each use for frayed power
cords, broken plugs, and cracked or broken housings.
If a tool is damaged, stop using it immediately. Repair
or replace it. Always use an extension cord marked
for outdoor use and rated for the power needs of your
tools. Unplug all portable power tools when not in use.
When using ladders, stay away from overhead wires and
power lines. Making contact with power lines can cause
serious injury or death.
Lightning. During electrical storms, do not use
appliances such as hair dryers, toasters, radios, or
telephones, except in an emergency. Do not take a
bath or shower. Keep batteries on hand for flashlights
in case of power outages. Use surge protectors on
electronic devices, appliances, telephones, faxes, and
modems. The best protection is to unplug electrical
equipment during an electrical storm.
Space Heaters. Space heaters are meant to supply
supplemental heat. Keep space heaters at least 3 feet
away from combustible materials such as bedding,
clothing, draperies, furniture, or rugs. Do not use them
in rooms where children are unsupervised. Turn off and
unplug space heaters when they are not in use. Do not
use space heaters with extension cords. Plug the heater
directly into an outlet of a relatively unburdened circuit.
Halogen Floor Lamps. Halogen floor lamps operate at
much higher temperatures than standard incandescent
lightbulbs. Never place a halogen floor lamp where it
can come into contact with drapes, clothing, or other
combustible materials. Be sure to turn the lamp off
when you leave the room and never use these types
of lamps in children’s rooms or playrooms. Consider
cooler fluorescent floor lamps.


ELECTRICITY 53
.Current in Motion
Electrical Floor Plan of a Room
For requirement 7, you will need to draw a simple floor plan
of a room in your house with lights, switches, and electrical
outlets penciled in.
First, make a drawing that shows the outlines of a room
in your house. Then use the electrical wiring symbols to draw
in the overhead and wall lights and to show where electric
switches and electrical outlets are located.
Next, ask a parent or guardian to go to the main breaker
box and turn off the circuit that supplies power to the room
you have chosen. Turn on the lights in the room before the
adult flips off the circuit breaker. If there is more than one
circuit breaker that corresponds to the room, note which
breaker supplies power to what outlets, lights, and switches by
checking them while the power is off.
To the side of your room drawing, make a box and
highlight the circuit breakers that supply power to the room.
Briefly note which breaker supplies power to the various
electrical devices in the room. Note the size fuse or circuit
breaker with which the room operates. Ask a parent or guardian
to check the fuse/circuit breaker size at the breaker box.
How to Read an Electric Meter
A watt-hour is a unit of energy. Electric companies charge
their customers on the basis of kilowatt-hours (kWh) used. Kilo
is the Greek word for one thousand. Thus, a kilowatt-hour is
1,000 watt-hours. One kilowatt-hour equals 1,000 watts used
for one hour (or any equivalent, such as 500 watts used for two
hours). The electric meter at your house measures kilowatt-


54 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Four-wire cable or raceway Resistor
Push button Single-pole,
single-throw switch
Buzzer One-cell battery
Bell Multicell battery
MotorM Bulb
Junction box
J Bulb in bulb holder
Chime (also CH ) AmmeterAM
Ground connection VoltmeterVM
Electrical Wiring Symbols
Three-wire cable or raceway GalvanometerG
Floor outlet Double-pole switchS2
Two-wire cable or raceway Three-way switchS3
Ceiling outlet Single-pole switch
S1 OR S


ELECTRICITY 55
.Current in Motion
hours; an electric bill shows the cost of the number of kilowatt-
hours used in a given period of time.
As part of requirement 8, you must learn how to read
an electric meter. Locate the electric meter at your home or
apartment. It will be either the digital display type or a
traditional dial meter.
In the past, electric meters were dial meters; see the next
page to learn how to read them. Most now are digital. Digital
meters are read as a direct numerical measurement. To find
out how many kilowatt-hours you used at your house in one
month, subtract last month’s bill-end date reading, which can
be found on your last electric bill, from this month’s bill-end
date reading directly from the digital meter’s display.
Determining the Cost of Electricity
To figure out how much your electricity bill will be, you must
know how much your electric company charges per kilowatt-
hour. You can find this out by looking at your family’s electric
bills. If the bill does not show a price per kilowatt-hour, you
can get a close estimate by dividing the amount of the bill by
the kilowatt-hours used.


56 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Reading a Dial Meter
With the dial (analog) meter, beginning with the left-
hand dial in the illustration below, notice that the last
figure passed by the pointer is 1. On the next dial, the
pointer has passed 7. (Some of the dials read clockwise,
others read counterclockwise. The pointer on this dial
goes counterclockwise.) The third dial has passed 5. On
the fourth dial, the pointer is between 9 and 0. Consider
9 in this case to be smaller than 0 because the 0 is really
a 10. Also, you always write down the number the
pointer has just passed, not the number it is moving
toward. The final pointer is exactly on 2. The meter
reading is 17592.
To find out how many kilowatt-hours you used
at your house in one month, subtract last month’s
reading, which can be found on your last electric bill,
from this month’s reading. For example:
Dial A B C D E
Present reading 1 7 5 9 2
Last month’s reading 1 6 6 0 2
Kilowatt-hours used 9 9 0
To figure out your electric consumption during any
period of time, simply subtract the reading taken at the
beginning of the period from the reading taken
at the end of the period.
A B C D E


ELECTRICITY 57
.Current in Motion
For example, an electric bill of $124.32 divided by
1,110 kWh works out to $0.112 (slightly more than 11 cents)
per kilowatt-hour. If your electric company charges 11 cents
per kilowatt-hour, the bill for 990 kWh (in the earlier meter-
reading example) would be 990 x 0.11 = $108.90.
Note that the dials give readings in multiples of 10. The dial
farthest to the right shows kilowatt-hours in single digits, the
next dial in tens, the next dial in hundreds, then thousands,
and the leftmost dial in ten thousands.
As you saw earlier, the hands on the dials of a meter turn
either clockwise or counterclockwise. The pointer on the dial
to the right must make a complete revolution, that is, reach
zero, before the pointer on the next dial will move one space,
and so on.
Conserve Energy, Reduce, Use
Consider how your family could conserve energy and reduce
your electric bill, then share your thoughts with your counselor.
The five keys to good energy management are:
1. Know your electric utility rates.
2. Know how much energy you are using.
3. Know where you are using the energy.
4. Know when you are using the energy.
5. Implement simple energy-management techniques.
Here are some ideas.
Turn off lights and electronic equipment after use. Set the
air conditioner at 78 degrees
during summer months and
the furnace at 68 degrees in
winter. If you are too cold or
too warm, layer your clothing
up or down accordingly. Turn
off the heat and open windows
on days when the temperature
is over 65 degrees. On cool
summer days, turn off the air
conditioner.


58 ELECTRICITY
Current in Motion.
Clean or replace heating and air-conditioning filters
at least once a month. Filters clogged with dust and air
pollutants make air-conditioning and heating your home
less efficient.
Install low-voltage outside lights. Install light-emitting diode
(LED) lights. LED lighting is a more efficient, cooler, and cost-
efficient form of lights that will greatly reduce lighting bills.
Do full loads of laundry. You can conserve water and electricity
and lower your electric costs by washing only full loads of laundry.
Grill food outside. Using an outdoor grill in good weather will
minimize use of the electric oven and stovetop.


ELECTRICITY 59
.Current in Motion
Electric Utility System
Refer to the Electric Utility System Map (see Electric Grid, page
32) containing the generation stations (fuel types), transmission
systems (EHV / HV), which are the sources of electricity to a
localized area, called the distribution system. The system feeds
electricity homes, busnesses, small factories, farms, and more.
The system map also includes things such as the smart grid,
distributed systems, etc. on the electric distribution system.
The smart grid is the 20th-century electrical grid
enhance with smart meters. It uses two-way communications
and distributed intelligent devices that work with digital
technologies, sensors, and software to better match the supply
and demand of electricity in real time. Two-way flows of
electricity and information could improve the electrical delivery
network while maintaining stability and reliability of the grid.
Virtual power plants (VPP) are collections of controllable
distributed energy resources (DERs) located at the end-
user’s location that provide electricity generation, storage,
and demand flexibility at a small scale (sub-utility scale).
These resources are usually connected to the lower-voltage
distribution grid. Examples of DERs include (but aren’t limited
to) rooftop solar panels, battery storage units, smart appliances,
electric vehicles (EV) chargers, and demand response programs.





ELECTRICITY 61
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
Responding to
Electrical Emergencies
Electrical outlets and wires pose the greatest danger to young
children. Preschoolers love to insert hairpins, paper clips, and
any number of other conductive objects into electrical sockets.
Toddlers often explore electrical outlets and wires by mouthing
them. Since water is an excellent conductor of electricity, there
is a danger of severe facial burns.
When not in use, electrical outlets should have protective
guards plugged into them or be hidden and hard to reach
behind furniture.
Electric Shock
Electric shock is caused by electric current passing through a
human body. The victim’s breathing may stop and the person’s
body may appear stiff. The electric contact must be broken as
quickly as possible.
If someone is in contact with a live circuit, do not touch
the person. You can become “stuck” to the person and part of
the electrical field. If the service panel is nearby, quickly shut
off the house current by throwing the main disconnect switch.
If it is a long way to the service panel, or you do not know
where the main disconnect switch is, use a nonconducting
object such as a wooden chair, wooden broom handle, rug, or
rubber doormat to separate the person from the live wire. Never
use a metal or wet object.
Under no circumstances should you ever
touch a victim or an electric wire with
your bare hands while the person is still in
contact with the electrical source.


62 ELECTRICITY
Responding to Electrical Emergencies.
High-Voltage Power Lines
Rescuing a person in contact with a
live power line outdoors is extremely
dangerous and should not be attempted
by a Scout. Call 911 immediately and let the fire
department and police handle that type of emergency.
Also, do not get within 20 feet of someone who is
being electrocuted by high-voltage electrical current
until the power is turned off and a utility or safety
worker declares the area safe.
Keep in mind that both water
and metals can conduct
electricity. If you are trying to
rescue a person touching a live
wire, stand on something dry
and nonconducting like a rubber
mat or wooden stool.
If you can’t separate the victim from the wire using
something like a broom handle, make sure you are standing on
a perfectly dry surface and use a dry towel, sheet, sweater, or
other heavy cloth to encircle the wire where it is not wet
or bare. Pull the wire from the victim. Never directly touch
the wire or the victim. Don’t touch grounded objects like
pipes under a sink.
If you can’t remove the wire, your final alternative is to
use a cloth to pull the victim from the wire. Without touching
the person, carefully loop a sweater or other piece of clothing
around the victim, and grasping the ends of the clothing, pull
the person away. You might have to pull some distance before
breaking contact with the wire. Do not touch the victim directly
until the victim and the wire are separated.
If the person is not breathing after the rescue, start artificial
respiration immediately. Call 911 for medical assistance.


ELECTRICITY 63
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
Treating Burns
Unless there is immediate danger, do not move a victim of
electrical injury. Do not apply ice, butter, ointments, medication,
bandages, or cotton dressings to electrical burns. Do not touch
burns, break blisters, or remove burned clothing. Electric shock
causes burns inside the body, so immediately seek medical
attention for the victim.
Once you and the victim are securely away from the
electrical source, check the person’s wrist and jugular vein
in the neck for a pulse. If the victim is not breathing, start
artificial respiration right away.


64 ELECTRICITY
Responding to Electrical Emergencies.
Life-Threatening Emergencies
The correct first aid given quickly can save a life. A person who
has stopped breathing must receive rescue breathing within
three to five minutes or brain damage will occur. People who
may need lifesaving first aid include victims of lightning strikes.
After calling for help, assess the situation to decide what you
should do and in which order.
An easy way to recall the order of treatment in a
life-threatening emergency is A-B-C-D: Airway, Breathing,
Circulation, and Defibrillation.
A is for airway. The airway is the passage that allows air
entering the mouth or nose to reach the lungs. Always protect
the airway of any accident victim. If the person begins to vomit,
turn the victim onto the side so that the vomit comes out of the
mouth and is not aspirated (inhaled) into the lungs.
If a victim is unconscious,
carefully place the person on their
back, protecting the head and neck
if you must roll the person over.
Then, open the airway by pressing
(or tilting) on the forehead with
one hand and lifting the chin with
the other to tilt back the head. This
action will keep the tongue from
blocking the person’s airway.
B is for breathing. After opening the victim’s airway, check
to see if the person can breathe normally. Place your cheek
in front of the victim’s mouth (about 1 to 2 inches away).
Look, listen, and feel for movement and breathing (signals of
circulation, or “signs of life”) for no more than 10 seconds.
If the person is breathing effectively, you will feel and hear
the airflow on your cheek and see and feel the chest rising
and falling at regular intervals. If there is no breathing or
movement; give two rescue breaths, then begin cardiopulmonary
resuscitation.
If opening the
airway restores
breathing, place
the victim in a
recovery position.
Continue to moni-
tor the person’s
breathing until
help arrives.
Always use a
breathing barrier
when performing
rescue breathing.
Find out if the person is conscious. Tap the person
on the shoulder to see if there is a response. Ask,
“Are you OK?” If there is no response, the person is
unconscious. Call or send for medical help.


ELECTRICITY 65
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
Once you have opened the airway, check for movement
and breathing for no more than 10 seconds. If the person still is
not breathing, give two rescue breaths.
Step 1—Place a CPR breathing
barrier over the victim’s mouth. That
may protect both of you from orally
transmitted diseases.
Step 2—Give two rescue breaths.
While maintaining the head-tilt,
pinch the nostrils, seal your mouth
over the victim’s mouth and blow
into it to fill the person’s lungs.
(For an infant, seal your mouth
over both the mouth and nose, then
breathe gently.) Each breath should
last about 1 second. Watch to see if
the chest clearly rises. Remove your
mouth and then give another rescue
breath.
Step 3—For a child or an infant,
after two rescue breaths, check for a
pulse for no more than 10 seconds.
If there is still no breathing, begin rescue breathing (1 breath
about every 3 seconds) and recheck for breathing and pulse
every 2 minutes as long as there is a pulse but no breathing. For
an adult, after two rescue breaths, begin CPR immediately if the
victim does not resume breathing.
C is for circulation. Signals of circulation mean that the heart
is still beating and circulating blood through the body. Normal
breathing and movement are signals of life and that there is
a heartbeat. In the case of young children (under age 12) and
infants, feeling for a pulse for no more than 10 seconds can also
be performed. If there are no signals that the heart is beating,
begin CPR immediately.
Accidents or medical conditions that cause a person to stop
breathing can also stop the heart. If the heart is not pumping
and circulating blood through the body, the victim will not be
breathing, moving, or making normal sounds. If you have
delivered two rescue breaths and the victim does not begin
If the victim
revives, put
the person in a
recovery posi-
tion and treat for
shock. Monitor
the person to
make sure
breathing does
not stop again.


66 ELECTRICITY
to breathe, you should perform cardiopulmonary resuscitation,
or CPR, immediately.
Learning CPR requires careful instruction from a certified
teacher. Perhaps you can practice CPR at Scout meetings. The
American Red Cross and American Heart Association offer
classes, too. Your Scout leaders can help you find training to
learn this lifesaving skill.
D is for defibrillation. The heart is made up of many muscle
fibers that usually contract and relax in unison to pump blood.
During a heart attack, those muscle fibers do not work together.
A heart attack can lead to what is known as “cardiac arrest.”
Another cause of cardiac arrest is an abnormal electrical heart
rhythm, most commonly known as ventricular fibrillation.
A machine called a defibrillator can send an electrical
shock through the heart to momentarily stop all electrical
activity. This pause gives the heart enough time to try to restore
an effective heartbeat (rhythm). A person whose heart has
stopped functioning can be treated with this special device,
if one is available. Ideally, this should happen within several
minutes of the victim’s collapse.
Most ambulances, hospitals, and emergency care facilities are
equipped with defibrillators for use by trained medical personnel.
Because a defibrillator must be used quickly (within several
minutes) to save a person’s life, a new type of defibrillator called
an automated external defibrillator (AED) has been developed.
Many first responders such as police officers and firefighters carry
and are trained in the use of AEDs.
An AED is computerized. It can check a person’s heart
rhythm and recognize a rhythm that requires a shock. It can
also advise the rescuer when a shock is needed.
AEDs are very accurate and easy to use. With only a few
hours of training, you can learn how to operate an AED safely
and effectively.
While the tech-
niques for CPR
are different for
adults, children,
and infants, the
cycle of 30 chest
compressions
followed by two
rescue breaths
applies to every-
one. To receive full
and proper CPR
training, contact
your American
Red Cross chapter
or the American
Heart Association.
See the resources
section in the
back for more
information.
Adult Child (one or two hands) Infant (two or
three fingers)


ELECTRICITY 67
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
You may need to
turn a person who
has been in a
recovery position
for 30 minutes
or longer to the
opposite side
to stimulate
circulation.
However, do not
move a person
with suspected
spinal injury
unless it is
absolutely
necessary.
Many public places such as airports and shopping malls
now have installed AEDs in clearly marked, designated
areas much the same way that fire extinguishers are
made readily available for access in an emergency.
Recovery Position
Place a victim who is unconscious but who is breathing
normally in a recovery position. Extend the person’s
lower arm in line with their body; support the head and
neck as you grasp the victim’s hip and shoulder, and
roll the victim toward you so that the person is lying on
the side. This will prevent the person from choking on
saliva, blood (from a bitten tongue), or vomit, and will
help keep the airway open. Continue to monitor the
person’s breathing until medical help arrives.
Recovery position for
a person who does
not have a suspected
spinal injury
Recovery position for
a person who may
have a spinal injury


68 ELECTRICITY
Responding to Electrical Emergencies.
Bathroom Injuries
In the case of an electrical injury in the bathroom, be especially
careful. It is best to throw the main disconnect switch and call
911. There are many grounded objects in a bathroom. The floor
is often wet, and it might be difficult to get the victim away from
the wire in the small, enclosed space of a typical bathroom.
Electrical Fire
Electrical fires are different from other fires. Because water
conducts electricity, you should never throw water on an
electrical fire. Here is what Southern California Edison
suggests you do in the event of electrical fire.
• Never use water on an electrical fire.
• Turn off the main power to the house.
• If the fire cannot be safely put out, leave the house
immediately and take everyone with you.
• Call 911 from the nearest phone once you and your
family are safely away from your home.
• There are different types or classes of fire extinguishers.
Class C extinguishers are recommended for use on electrical
fires due to the danger of electrical current conduction and
possible electrocution with other types of extinguishers
Electrical Storm
The draw of an open wilderness is powerful, but so are lightning
strikes that are possible during an electrical storm. If caught in
If the fire can be safely put out, tell an adult to use a proper
chemical fire extinguisher.


ELECTRICITY 69
.Responding to Electrical Emergencies
the outdoors and there is no safe shelter nearby, avoid open
fields; the tops of hills, ridges, and mountains; bodies of water;
and the bases of tall, isolated trees and other tall objects, such
as flagpoles. If you are in a forest, stay near a lower stand of
trees. Avoid wet items, such as ropes, and metal objects, such
as fences and poles. Be aware that tents offer no protection
from lightning.
The best thing to do when a storm approaches is to seek shelter
in a safe building or vehicle. A safe building is one that is fully
enclosed with a roof, walls, and floor and has plumbing or wiring.
A safe vehicle is one that is fully enclosed with a metal top.





ELECTRICITY 71
.Careers In Electricity
Careers in
Electricity
The electrical industry has several general areas with many
types of careers available in each area. These areas include
manufacturing, construction, merchandising, operating,
servicing or maintaining, and engineering electrical parts,
equipment, and systems. Training requirements vary in each
area. Some positions require a college degree, while a degree
from a vocational school is adequate for other careers. Some
companies allow on-the-job training, but almost all require at
least a high school diploma.
In electricity manufacturing (electrical generating
stations, transmission, and distribution substation systems)
positions are available in multiple different areas. Occupations
include assemblers, that is, the people who help build electrical
equipment and/or systems. A high school education is needed
as well as mechanical aptitude.


72 ELECTRICITY
Careers In Electricity
Merchandising, or sales, is another field for those
interested in electricity. Someone who has technical
knowledge and enjoys talking with and meeting people could
do well in electrical equipment or systems sales. Education
can include a high school diploma or degrees from vocational
schools or college.


ELECTRICITY 73
.Careers In Electricity
Many types of electrical equipment are so specialized
that they require trained operators. An operator might
work with computers, cameras, satellite tracking devices,
telecommunication systems, ship radios, or medical machines.
In some cases, the operators must maintain and repair their
own equipment. Education from a vocational school, a degree
from a college or university, or training in the military usually is
needed for these positions.
Because of the complexity of many electrical machines,
service and maintenance people are always needed. Any
electrical device can fail or malfunction from time to time, and
people are needed to make quick and expert repairs.
Technicians can have a variety of positions. They might
be required, among other things, to turn engineering ideas
into hardware, repair equipment, or calibrate (adjust) test
instruments. Most technicians have one or two years of
technical training after high school. Some receive training in
the military, and others go to a vocational school or junior
college. Some receive on-the-job training or study at home by
correspondence. Many occupations require ongoing training so
that technicians remain current with changing technology.
A highly trained electrical engineer might design electrical
equipment or large electrical systems. Electrical engineers
usually have a bachelor’s degree or higher in engineering.
As with technicians, engineers must constantly update their
education to keep up with new components and techniques.


74 ELECTRICITY
Electricity Resources.
Scouting Literature
Deck of First Aid; Chemistry, Electronics,
Energy, Engineering, First Aid,
Home Repairs, Inventing, Lifesaving,
Nuclear Science, and Safety merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Asimov, Isaac. The Kite That Won the
Revolution. Houghton Mifflin Company,
2000.
Bartholomew, Alan. Electric Gadgets and
Gizmos. Kids Can Press, 1998.
Billings, Charlene W. Superconductivity:
From Discovery to Breakthrough.
Cobblehill Books; Dutton, 1991.
De Pinna, Simon. Electricity Science
Projects. Raintree Steck Vaughn, 1998.
DiSpezio, Michael Anthony. Awesome
Experiments in Electricity and
Magnetism. Sterling, 2006.
Dixon, Malcolm, and Karen Smith.
Electricity. Evans Brothers, 2005.
Epstein, Sam and Beryl. The First
Book of Electricity, rev. ed.
Franklin Watts, 1977.
Flaherty, Michael. Electricity and
Batteries (Science Factory). Copper
Beach Books, 2008.
Gibilisco, Stan. Teach Yourself Electricity
and Electronics. McGraw-Hill, 2011.
Good, Keith. Zap It! Exciting Electricity
Activities. Lerner Publications
Co., 2003.
Matt, Stephen R. Electricity and Basic
Electronics. The Goodheart-Willcox
Co. Inc., 2012.
Meiani, Antonella. Magnetism:
Experimenting With Science.
Lerner Publications Co., 2003.
Morrison, Ralph. Electricity: A Self-
Teaching Guide. John Wiley, 2003.
Parker, Steve. Electricity and Magnetism.
Gareth Stevens Publishing, 2007.
Electricity Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ELECTRICITY 75
.Electricity Resources
Parker, Steve. Eyewitness: Electricity.
DK Publishing, 2005.
Parsons, Alexandra. Make it Work!
Electricity. World Book Inc., 1997.
Riley, Peter D. Electricity (Straightforward
Science). Franklin Watts, 1999.
Royston, Angela. Using Electricity (My
World of Science). Heinemann, 2008.
Wood, Robert W. Electricity and
Magnetism FUNdamentals: FUNtastic
Science Activities for Kids. Chelsea
House, 1998.
Wood, Robert W. Physics for Kids: 49
Easy Experiments With Electricity
and Magnetism. TAB Books, 1990.
Organizations and Websites
Boston Museum of Science
Telephone: 617-723-2500
Theater of Electricity:
mos.org/live-presentations/lightning
Electrical Safety Foundation
International (ESFI)
1300 17th Street North, Suite 900
Arlington, VA 22209
703-841-3229
esfi.org
Energy Information Administration
1000 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20585
eia.gov
Energy Kids Page
eia.gov/kids
How Stuff Works
4235 Redwood Ave.
Marina Del Rey, CA 90066
howstuffworks.com
Institute of Electrical and
Electronics Engineers
445 Hoes Lane
Piscataway, NJ 08854-4141
Telephone: 732-981-0060
ieee.org
National Energy Education
Development Project
8408 Kao Circle
Manassas, VA 20110
Telephone: 703-257-1117
need.org
North American Electric
Reliability Corporation
1325 G St. NW, Suite 600
Washington, DC 20005-3801
Telephone: 202-400-3000
nerc.com
Safe Electricity.org
4440 Ash Grove Dr., Suite B
Springfield, IL 62711
safeelectricity.org
Society of Women Engineers (SWE)
130 East Randolph Street, Suite 3500
Chicago, IL 60601
Telephone: 312.596.5223
swe.org
U.S. Department of Energy
1000 Independence Ave. SW
Washington, DC 20585
Telephone: 202-586-5000
energy.gov


76 ELECTRICITY
Electricity Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in
updating this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
The Franklin Institute Science Museum,
courtesy—page 9 (lightning rod)
Getty Images—pages 2, 22, 24, 28, 29, 32
(Illustrations: Marcie Rodriguez), 33,
49, 50, 57, 58, 70, 71, and 77
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 14
(Hauksbee demonstrating
electrostatic generator)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or
are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—pages 19 (both) and 38-41
(steps for making a motor)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 6, 7, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20-21, 47,
48, 64-66
Brian Payne—pages 42-43 (steps for
making a rheostat), 44 (Scout
looking at breaker box), 53, 55, 60,
63, and 68
Scouting America is grateful to
the Components, Packaging, and
Manufacturing Technology Society of
the Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers, and to former Scoutmaster
and six-time National Scout Jamboree
staff member Ralph W. Russell II of the
IEEE Precollege Education Coordinating
Committee for lending their time and
expertise in the 2004 edition of the
Electricity merit badge pamphlet.
Scouting America also wishes to
thank the members of Mr. Russell’s peer
review committee.
• Scouter Michael N. Geselowitz, Ph.D.,
director of the IEEE
History Center, who has served as a
Cubmaster, den leader, pack committee
member, troop committee member,
and member of his council’s Jewish
Committee on Scouting
• Don Harris, Arnold Iturrieta, and
William Harris, IEEE senior leaders
in the electric power industry as well
as key leaders in various local and
national Scouting volunteer roles
• Walter Hyde, National Scout Jamboree
(NSJ ’23) Electricity MB staff lead and
local volunteer
• Norman McFarland, who led and
mentored Scouts to plan, design, test,
and launch an experiment to NASA’s
International Space Station
• Scouter Al Mouton, president of AGM
Systems
• Lee Reed Sr., safety specialist for
Dominion Resources Services
• Rick Tavan, retired vice
president of engineering of TIBCO
Software, and Electricity merit badge
counselor
• Dan Ward, principal engineer for
Dominion Virginia Power
• Paul Wesling, vice president of
publications for IEEE’s CPMT Society,
Eagle Scout, Scoutmaster, Venture
crew leader, and recipient of Scouting
America’s Silver Beaver and Heroism
awards





78 ELECTRICITY
Notes


ELECTRICITY 79
Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a
special offer priced just for Scouts.


MERIT BADGE LIBRARY
Though intended as an aid to youth in Scouts BSA and qualified Venturers and
Sea Scouts in meeting merit badge requirements, Scouting America's merit badge
pamphlets are of general interest and are made available by many schools and public
libraries.
Always check scouting.org for the latest merit badge requirements. If a Scout has
already started working on a merit badge when new requirements for that merit badge
are introduced, they may continue to use the same pamphlet to earn the badge and
fulfill the requirements therein. In other words, the Scout need not start over again with
the revised requirements.
SCOUTING AMERICA
To place an order,
call 800-323-0736 or go to
scoutshop.org
American Business
American Cultures
American Heritage
American Indian Culture
American Labor
Animal Science
Animation
Archaeology
Archery
Architecture
Art
Astronomy
Athletics
Automotive Maintenance
Aviation
Backpacking
Basketry
Bird Study
Bugling
Camping
Canoeing
Chemistry
Chess
Citizenship in the Community
Citizenship in the Nation
Citizenship in Society
Citizenship in the World
Climbing
Coin Collecting
Collections
Communication
Composite Materials
Cooking
Crime Prevention
Cycling
Dentistry
Digital Technology
Disabilities Awareness
Dog Care
Drafting
Electricity
Electronics
Emergency Preparedness
Energy
Engineering
Entrepreneurship
Environmental Science
Exploration
Family Life
Farm Mechanics
Fingerprinting
Fire Safety
First Aid
Fish & Wildlife Management
Fishing
Fly-Fishing
Forestry
Game Design
Gardening
Genealogy
Geocaching
Geology
Golf
Graphic Arts
Health Care Professions
Hiking
Home Repairs
Horsemanship
Insect Study
Inventing
Journalism
Kayaking
Landscape Architecture
Law
Leatherwork
Lifesaving
Mammal Study
Metalwork
Mining in Society
Model Design and Building
Motorboating
Moviemaking
Multisport
Music
Nature
Nuclear Science
Oceanography
Orienteering
Painting
Personal Fitness
Personal Management
Pets
Photography
Pioneering
Plant Science
Plumbing
Pottery
Programming
Public Health
Public Speaking
Pulp & Paper
Radio
Railroading
Reading
Reptile & Amphibian Study
Rifle Shooting
Robotics
Rowing
Safety
Salesmanship
Scholarship
Scouting Heritage
Scuba Diving
Sculpture
Search & Rescue
Shotgun Shooting
Signs, Signals, Codes
Skating
Small-Boat Sailing
Snow Sports
Soil & Water Conservation
Space Exploration
Sports
Stamp Collecting
Surveying
Sustainability
Swimming
Textile
Theater
Traffic Safety
Truck Transportation
Veterinary Medicine
Water Sports
Weather
Welding
Whitewater
Wilderness Survival
Wood Carving
Woodwork


SKU 656202
35886 2026 Printing