FAMILY LIFE


SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
FAMILY LIFE
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35893
ISBN 978-0-8395-3243-9
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Some of the issues surrounding requirement 6
for the family meeting could be considered of a
personal nature. Use discretion when reviewing
this requirement with the Scout.


FAMILY LIFE 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Family-Life or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.


4 FAMILY LIFE


FAMILY LIFE 5
Contents
What Is a Family? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Family Meeting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
The Dangers of Drugs and Substance Abuse . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Family Matters . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Understanding the Growing-Up Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Your Future Family . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Family Life Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61





FAMILY LIFE 7
.What Is a Family?
What Is a Family?
The family is the basic unit of society and is important to both
individuals and communities. The world in which we live is
rapidly changing, making today’s society much more complex
than ever before. As you earn this merit badge, you will realize
why it is important to know more about family life and how to
strengthen our families.
Families are the small groups in which we learn our first
and most important lessons about how to live and be happy in
the larger society. Strong families are the foundation of strong
communities. You know that a strong foundation is needed to
construct a sturdy building. Think of society as the building, the
family as the foundation of that building, and individuals and
the community as pieces of building material. All the parts are
important and none can be left out, but it all starts with a strong
foundation. Just as these parts are necessary to have a strong
building, your basic understanding about families and how to
strengthen them will help you, your family, your community,
and society, now and in the future.
A family is made up of people who care about one another. All
members of a family give and receive love and support from the
others. Family members reach out to one another and share both
happy and sad times together. They talk and listen
to one another, and they share ideas,
thoughts, and concerns. They
share fun as well as sorrow
and help heal one another’s
hurts. All of this makes the
foundation stronger.


8 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
Learning begins in the family, where basic physical and
material needs are met, training takes place, and character
and lifelong behaviors develop. Family is the foundation for
physical, emotional, social, intellectual, and moral development.
Families feed, clothe, and provide shelter to their members.
They also provide love, nurturing, and protection from harm.
People learn to speak, think, and trust, and to feel and express
emotions from being a part of a family. Mature family members
teach the younger ones important skills like how to get along
with others and how to know right from wrong.
Family life will always have its ups and downs as family
members go through both good times and unpleasant ones. But
in most strong families, people give support and show concern
and loyalty to one another when needed. Communities and
society care about families, too, by creating laws and providing
services to help families.
When times are
difficult, family
members learn
how to pull
together. This
helps them get
through those
tough times.


FAMILY LIFE 9
.What Is a Family?
Many families also share faith and religious
activities with one another. As a Scout, part of your
duty is to do your best to make your family strong
and help your family thrive. By doing this, you
are helping to lay the foundation for a stronger
community and society.
Good Turns at Home
Your family life will be one of best opportunities to put the
Scout slogan into practice. “Do A Good Turn Daily”
means a lot more than just doing your household chores
and homework without being reminded. Doing kind
deeds for others is great way to show that you love and
appreciate them. Some examples might include:
• Taking a moment to read a book or do an activity
with a younger sibling
• Doing the chore of another family member who is
either unwell or struggling with a stressful situation
• Saying a kind word when someone is sad
• Keeping the home clean by picking up trash or pulling
weeds in the yard
• Sharing a funny story
• Sending a kind message to a grandparent or other family
member who is away from home
• Making an extra effort to practice good etiquette
• Playing with a pet
• Helping bring in the groceries
• Noticing when someone needs help
• Preparing a meal or treats for your family
The Family Structure
No two families are alike. For many Scouts, the family is made
up of parents, brothers, and sisters who all live under the
same roof. But there are other types of families, too. Some
Scouts may have a single parent; some have stepparents and
stepbrothers and stepsisters. Some Scouts may have adoptive
or foster parents or no parents at all. Some families may be
large, while others are small.
Due to economic
or other
reasons, some
families include
nonrelatives like
friends who share
a household.


10 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
In today’s families, one or both parents may work, either
traveling to an office or working from home. In some families,
parents may be at home due to early retirement or other factors.
In other situations, grandparents and other relatives may share
the home; there may also be aunts, uncles, and cousins who
live nearby. Other family members might live in another city,
state, or country.
Each family forms its own set of values and decides what is
most important to them. Discipline also varies among families.
Families have different ways of dealing with different issues.
In some families, one or both parents make all the decisions
with no input from the children, while other families may
encourage input from all family members before decisions are
made. Perhaps you know of a family where there is equal
decision-making among family members.
There is no one family style for everyone. A family’s style
develops based on each family’s individual situation and the val-
ues they care about. For example, your family may be quiet and
relaxed, while another family is very active and hurried. Many
different ways of living together can work. What makes a family
strong is not the number of people in it, whether its members
are related, or their pace of life; people caring for one another
and sharing their lives is what really matters.
No family is ideal
or perfect. Most
real families are
very different from
what you may see
on television or in
magazines. Do not
let these images
mislead you.


FAMILY LIFE 11
.What Is a Family?
Who Is Your Family?
Think about your own family. Who are the members? You
may be a member of a small family or a very large one. You
may live with one or both parents or have to share your time
between them. You may be an only child or have brothers
and sisters. You may be the oldest, middle, or youngest child.
You may also have other relatives living with you, near you,
or far away. You may be adopted or have stepparents. Perhaps
you have no parents and are cared for by other relatives or
guardians. You may live in a foster home or in a youth home,
and you may have a temporary family in addition to your
regular family. Remember that every family is different.
Types of Families
• Nuclear family (parents and their children)
• Extended family (members beyond the nuclear family such as
grandparents, aunts, uncles, and cousins)
• Single-parent family (one parent with children)
• Blended family (made up of stepparents and stepbrothers
or stepsisters)
• Adoptive family (family with children who are not biologically linked
to their parents)
• Childless family (couple who does not have children)


12 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
Family life is all about touching each other’s lives so every-
one benefits. But that takes work because you are all helping to
build a solid foundation. Remember that there will be ups and
downs. You can play an important role by always doing your
best to help your family flourish and be happy and by building
bridges of mutual respect and love. You also can help lay the
foundation to strengthen your community and society.
Positive Family Traits
Just as an athletic team works and plays together, each person
who is part of a family can affect everyone else for better or
worse. Strong and supportive families do not just happen. Like
a winning team, each family member needs to develop certain
traits and skills and then practice being a strong and supportive
member of the family.
Your family provides you with shelter, food, and cloth-
ing. They make you feel safe and loved. They want
you to be the best person you can be. No matter what
your age, you can make the most of your family life
and help your family grow strong.


FAMILY LIFE 13
.What Is a Family?
Here are some positive traits that will help form and maintain
a strong family. Most of these will be discussed further in
this pamphlet.
• Love
• Security
• Acceptance and respect
• Mutual trust
• Good relationship and communication skills
• Shared roles and responsibilities
• Cooperation and interdependence
• Time spent together
• Good management skills (for example,
financial or organizational)
Love
There are many different ways that family members show they
love one another. Caring about how other family members feel,
sharing their hurts, helping them solve problems, and being
there for them at important times are just a few ways to show
love. Knowing they are loved unconditionally can help loved
ones through difficulties and bring them a feeling of security,
happiness, peace, and contentment.
You can show love for your family through special words,
deeds, and actions such as not being afraid to say “I love you,”
spending time with your family, doing favors for family mem-
bers, listening to what they have to say, being patient, and doing
things without being asked. In what other ways can you show
love to your family? In what other ways do your family mem-
bers show they love you?
Security
Security refers to physical and psychological safety. Families
can provide security. People feel secure when they know that
their physical needs are being met and that they are protected
and safe from harm. Receiving encouragement, guidance, and
training from the family makes family members feel secure.
By contrast, troubled family members who feel insecure
may be distrustful and suspicious of others. This can create
an unstable environment. Financial problems, health troubles,
divorce, and other kinds of problems also can cause insecurity
in a family.
Loving family
members even
when you do not
always agree
with what they
do, say, think,
or feel is called
unconditional love.


14 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
Acceptance and Respect
You are important. Of all the billions of people in the world,
no two are exactly alike. There is no one else like you. You are
special. Without you, your family would not be the same. You
are important to your family, because you fill a special place in
your family that no one else can fill.
Part of growing up is learning to accept and respect yourself
and others. It is important to recognize that each person has
strengths and limitations. Each person has some talents, gifts,
or strengths that makes him or her unique. Everyone should
respect these qualities and understand how they can make posi-
tive contributions to family life.
There are many ways you can add to the strength,
happiness, and well-being of your family. Ask yourself the
following questions.
• Do you live by the Scout Oath and Law and set a good
example for other family members?
• Are you dependable and honest?
• As a Scout, are you always prepared to help your family
members, neighbors, and friends in an emergency?
• Do you have a positive attitude that makes others enjoy
being with you?
• Do you understand and respect the unique structure and
style of your family?
• Do you understand the importance of your family to the
community and society?
• Do you understand the traits and skills needed to make your
family stronger?
• Do you enjoy helping care for younger family members such
as reading to them or teaching them to do worthwhile things?
• Do you help carry on family traditions?
• Do you let other family members know you care about them
and appreciate what they do for you?
• Are you willing to help around the house?
• Do you offer to help without being asked?


FAMILY LIFE 15
.What Is a Family?
Mutual Trust
Your parents or guardians know you better than anyone else.
They know your strengths and weaknesses. They know what
things might tempt you. They have probably set guidelines
to help protect you, help you grow, and help you make
thoughtful decisions.
What does trust mean to
you? Perhaps you think it means
that you should be permitted to
go anywhere and do whatever
you want to do. That’s not really
trust. However, if you make good
decisions and show that you
keep your word and follow the
guidelines set by your parent or
guardian, you prove that you can
be trusted.
Trust is something
that must be
earned. You
can earn trust
by keeping
your word and
by being
truthful, reliable,
unselfish, and
caring. Remember,
being trustworthy is
one of the 12 points
of the Scout Law.


16 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
Good Relationship and Communication Skills
Good communication helps prevent misunderstandings and
involves both listening and talking. Sometimes people make
the mistake of talking too much and listening too little.
All families have disagreements from time to time. There
may be times when you feel that others in your family do not
understand you. You may disagree with the way a family mem-
ber does something. One of the best ways to maintain under-
standing in a family is to listen to each other. When people
listen, they learn to respect the opinions of others, to cooperate
to meet each other’s needs, and to be sensitive and responsive
to others. As a result, disagreements can be resolved. Listening
is the beginning of understanding.
A good way to improve family communication is to send
clear messages. “You” messages can put down or make the
other person feel guilty. Such statements involve blaming oth-
ers. “I” messages accept responsibility and tell what you are
thinking or feeling without blaming or offending the other per-
son. Here are some examples.
People usually are better at communicating their
thoughts rather than their feelings. Communicating
feelings helps family members better understand one
another as opposed to using methods such as blam-
ing, shouting, denying, bottling feelings inside, or
even physical abuse. Learning how to communicate
feelings takes work and practice.
Instead of Saying This Say This
“You are the meanest person in
the world!”
“I really feel angry with you because you
won’t let me go out tonight.”
“Will you shut up?” “When you tap on the table with your fork,
it makes me mad because it’s noisy and I
can’t concentrate on my homework.”
“You never ask if you can use my
bike; you think it’s OK to ride my
bike without my permission!”
“When you take my bike without asking,
I feel angry.”


FAMILY LIFE 17
.What Is a Family?
Here are some roadblocks to good communication.
• Criticizing. No one likes ridicule, sarcasm, or negative
comments. These hurt and put down a person.
• Judging. Quick judgments cause tension and close
communication channels.
• Labeling. Assigning negative labels such as lazy, sloppy,
slow, mean, and stupid to someone is hurtful. Sometimes
people begin to live up to those labels.
Shared Roles and Responsibilities
Think of all the responsibilities involved in running a home
and raising a family. Managing a home is a lot of work.
Doing your share in the family will help make things run more
smoothly. It is also a good way for you to prepare for the
future and the responsibilities that will be required of you as
an adult. A good way to show your responsibility and commit-
ment to your family is to do your chores without complaining
or being asked. When you carry out these responsibilities, you
are letting the family members know that you love them and
that they can depend on you.
As you depend
on your family
members,
they also will
depend on you.
This is called
interdependence.
When communication is good, people say what they mean to
say. There are no hidden meanings to guess or worry about.
Unclear communication creates insecurity.


18 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
Cooperation and Interdependence
The more each family member cooperates by participating in
the management of the home, the more smoothly things will
go. Think about some of your own responsibilities and how
you might help other family members with their chores. Here
is a list of suggested duties. You might already be doing some
of these. See if you can add other ideas to the list.
Your Room
• Make your bed.
• Hang up your clothes.
• Put all your belongings away.
• Clean the floor.
• Keep all surface areas clean and neat.
Family Meals
• Set and clear the table.
• Help prepare the meal.
• Help with meal planning and
food shopping.
• Carry in the grocery bags and
put the groceries away.
• Wash, dry, and put away the dishes.
• Sweep the floor after meals.


FAMILY LIFE 19
.What Is a Family?
General Chores
• Take out the trash or recycling.
• Wash the family vehicle.
• Help with simple home repairs.
• Clean the bathroom.
• Dust and vacuum.
• Mop the floors.
• Help younger brothers and sisters or elderly relatives.
• Help care for family pets.
Laundry
• Wash, fold, and put away the laundry.
• Iron your clothes.
• Make simple clothing repairs such as sewing on buttons.


20 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
Yard Work
• Clean up the yard.
• Mow the lawn and trim shrubs.
• Shovel snow.
• Plant and care for a family garden.
• Water plants (indoors and outside)
and the lawn.
• Paint when needed.
Use this sample home duties
chart to create your own. Most
of these tasks need to be done
every day.
Home Duties Chart Day Completed
Home Duties S M T W TH F S
1. Your Room
• Make your bed. X X X X X X X
• Hang up clothes. X X X X X X X
• Put belongings away. X X X X X X X
2. Family Meals
• Set and clear the table. X X X X X X X
• Put away the dishes. X X X X X X X
3. General Chores
• Take out the trash.* X X
• Clean the bathroom.* X X X
• Feed the family pets. X X X X X X X
4. Laundry
• Fold and put away laundry.* X X
• Iron your clothes.* X X
5. Yard Work
• Mow and trim the lawn. X
• Water plants.* X X
*Denotes a chore that should be done as needed or at least once a week.


FAMILY LIFE 21
.What Is a Family?
SPECIAL PROJECTS FOR YOU
In addition to your regular duties, you can do many other
things around the home that would benefit your family. Take
some time to think about what projects need to be done and
which ones you could do. You might ask other family members
to give you some suggestions. See how many other items you
can add to the list shown here, such as the project you have
outlined for requirement 4.
• Build or create new storage areas for your room.
• Organize the clothes in your closets and drawers.
• Paint your room or another room in the house.
• Prepare a family meal on your own.
• Clean and organize a kitchen cupboard.
• Wipe down the stove or refrigerator.
Go through all your clothes and belong-
ings, and fill a box with items that you
no longer need. Donate them to charity.
Take down the window treatments
and wash the windows.


22 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
• Clean the garage, attic, or basement.
• Give the family pet a bath.
• Do the laundry for another family member.
• Assist other family members by helping them do their
chores or providing some special help if needed.
• Create a home video or digital scrapbook of family events.
• Teach a family member how to use the computer and the
internet (with your parent or guardian’s permission).
• Help a younger brother or sister with homework.
• Read a story to a younger sibling.
Give the family pet a brush.


FAMILY LIFE 23
.What Is a Family?
Time Spent Together
As part of the Scout Oath, you pledge “to help other people
at all times.” There are many projects you can do to help
others, but there are lots of projects you and your family can
do together.
Working on requirement 5 is an excellent opportunity for
your family to work together on a special project. It can be a
service project for someone else or a project that can benefit
your family. To get ideas for a project, think about activities
you like to do with your family and some of the things that your
family needs done. Select a project that will involve as many
family members as possible and that is fun and enjoyable. There
might even be some activities that you can do together that may
help the members of your community.
You may want to
do some service
activities on your
own at another
time. This also
might inspire you
to earn one of
the citizenship
merit badges.
Many schools promote service learning to help
students become more aware of the many benefits
of helping others. It is a wonderful feeling to know
that you have provided help to others, such as elderly
or disabled people. Thoughtful acts of service can be
fun and will not only strengthen your family but will
also provide much needed help to your neighborhood,
community, state, or even the nation.


24 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
Here are some suggestions for family projects.
• Create a scrapbook or video of your family’s history. Learn
about your family roots. (This may spark your interest in
the Genealogy merit badge.) Include family customs and
traditions. Interview elderly family members so they may
share their memories of earlier years. Be sure to record this
information.
• Can, preserve, or freeze fruits and vegetables.
• Prepare a week’s worth of meals together to freeze for
future use.
• Plan, prepare, and conduct a family reunion or party for a
special event.
• Plan and conduct a garage sale.
• Start a new family tradition. Here are some ideas.
—Have a regular family night once a week. You can even
vary the theme.
—Celebrate family birthdays in special ways.
—Plant a tree to commemorate the birth of each new family
member or those whom you have lost.
—Make a list of thoughtful gestures that can be done for
the family. Have each family member choose one every
Sunday and do it during the week.
Your family might decide on
a project that will benefit
the community.
• Plan, cook, and deliver a
meal to a person who is con-
fined at home.
• Bake items for a bake sale
that benefits a local senior
citizens group.
• Spruce up a community
center by painting, cleaning,
doing yard work, etc.
Before you decide
on and carry
out your project,
you will need
the approval of
your parents
or guardians
and your merit
badge counselor.
Do home repairs for elderly people in your
neighborhood or community.


FAMILY LIFE 25
.What Is a Family?
• Help out at a food bank by stocking shelves, making
deliveries, assembling food baskets, or conducting food
or clothing drives.
• Assist with a community beautification project such as
picking up trash, raking leaves, planting a garden, or
creating a bike path.
• Run a bike-repair clinic for children or senior citizens in
your community.
• Assist at a local animal shelter.
• Clean and deliver toys to needy children.
• Plan a program for people in long-term care facilities.
• Help local citizens put up flags for display.
• Volunteer at an ethnic community festival to learn about
a culture different from your own.
PLANNING
Be sure you know the objective or goal of your project.
• Think about what needs to be done. Do you want to do a
project that will benefit your family? Your neighborhood?
Your community? Your state or the nation? To choose a
project, you may need to ask people or read about current
issues in the newspaper.
• Decide what you will do, why you are doing it, and who
will benefit.
• Be sure that it is OK to do your project before you begin.
You may need to get permission from the group or agency
you intend to help. Some groups have specific rules for
anyone who wants to volunteer their services.
• Be sure you have all the supplies you will need.
PERFORMING THE SERVICE
Before you begin, answer the following questions.
• What activity will you do?
• How will you do it?
• Who will do what?
• When will it be done?


26 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
REFLECT ON WHAT YOU HAVE ACCOMPLISHED
Afterward, think about your project and what you
have achieved.
• What did you accomplish?
• How did doing this make you and your family feel?
• What did it do to make your family feel closer?
• What did this mean for the group that benefited from
your project?
• What could you do in the future?
• How might you improve the project?
• How has doing this project changed the way you feel about
helping others?
Be sure to celebrate a job well done with your family!


FAMILY LIFE 27
.What Is a Family?
Good Management Skills
Effectively managing a family requires balancing time and
money. It means taking the time to do what needs to be done
so that the family will have time to do fun things together, too.
It means making responsible financial decisions that do not
put the family at risk.
TIME MANAGEMENT
You may have heard the saying “A family that plays together,
stays together.” Well, in order to have time to play and relax,
families need to plan and use their time wisely. Setting goals
and priorities will help your family stay on track.
Say that your family is thinking about buying a new car.
It’s Saturday, and you, your dad and stepmom, and your sister
want to see the auto show in town. The family van needs to be
washed. If all of you pitch in, the chore will take far less time.
Best of all, you will have plenty of time left to see the auto


28 FAMILY LIFE
What Is a Family?.
show. Solving time problems takes a little
planning and some cooperation, but it pays
off in the long run.
Here are some ways you can manage
your time more wisely.
• Reward yourself for accomplishments
along the way, like enjoying a juicy apple
for a snack after your homework is done.
• Schedule some relaxation time each
day; everyone needs some downtime. Be
sure to communicate this to your parent
so that you are not relaxing or taking a
break when he or she thinks you should
be working.
• Schedule “emergency” time for activi-
ties that take longer than expected or for
unanticipated matters.
• Create a to-do list and check off
each item as you complete it so that you can see
your progress.
• Try to schedule the most difficult tasks at a time when you
are the most productive, such as in the morning if you are a
morning person.
• Make sure you get enough sleep. Studies show that
teenagers need eight to nine hours of sleep each night.
• Be flexible, and make adjustments if necessary.
• Ask for help or instructions if you need them.
• Eliminate low-priority items from your to-do list.
• Determine important priorities. Be prepared to say no—to
yourself, to family, to friends—to things that might interfere
with your schoolwork.
MONEY MANAGEMENT
“Take care of the pennies and the dollars will take care of
themselves.” This old saying suggests that doing without little
things now can help you save for bigger, more important
things later on. In other words, do not waste money on items
you do not really need.
Stop and ask
yourself, “What is
the best use of my
time right now?”


FAMILY LIFE 29
.What Is a Family?
You may earn money for mowing lawns or
pet-sitting, or you may receive an allowance.
This is your income, the money available for
your use. Regardless of where your money
comes from, it is still important to know how
to handle it wisely.
Record your spending patterns for a few
weeks to find out where your money goes.
You may contribute money to family expenses
or charity, or be expected to help pay for your
clothing, entertainment, or school supplies. These
are your expenses. Some expenses are fixed,
that is, the amount you need to spend on them stays the same
from month to month. Examples of fixed expenses are what
you pay for school lunches, transportation, and school activity
fees. Other expenses are flexible, which means they vary. Some
examples of flexible expenses are purchases of computer games
and school supplies.
Money is impor-
tant, but it is not
the most impor-
tant thing in life.
Some of the more
important things
include your
family, friends,
and faith.
Here are some money-management tips.
• Develop a budget. A budget is a plan for spending
and saving the money you have available. It helps
you prioritize what you need and want.
• Limit impulse purchases. For example, suppose
you are at a concert and everyone is buying T-shirts.
You might want to buy one, too, but if the shirts
are overpriced and you already have a drawer full
of T-shirts, buying it would be a waste of money.
Don’t feel the need to purchase a game just
because your friends are buying games, too.
• Avoid shopping when you are under the influence
of a strong emotion. Some people use shopping
as a form of therapy when they are angry, hurt, or
disappointed. Buying yourself something is not
going to solve the problem.
• Stay within your budget limits. If you go over your
budget, you will need to remember to earn more
and spend less.
If you have ever saved for
something expensive that you really
wanted, you know how rewarding it
can feel.





.The Family Meeting
The Family Meeting
It is important that family members talk and listen to one
another. With today’s hectic schedules, families often do not
take the time needed for this. Scheduling a family meeting on
a regular basis is a good way to make sure this happens. It
also is a good way to handle small concerns while they are
still manageable.
Guidelines
Include in the meeting as many family members who live in
the household as possible. In some instances, family members
who live elsewhere, such as married siblings or grandparents,
might also be invited to attend if their input is relevant to the
current discussion. Some families might decide that certain
topics are not suitable for all family members to be present.
Each family will have its own comfort level. For example,
when speaking about the growing-up process or family
finances, some families may decide to limit who is present
for that discussion.
Set a day, time, and place in advance. This may vary from
week to week depending on the family’s other obligations, but
it works best if the day and time remain the same. Once a week
is a good start. Some issues may take more than one meeting
to resolve.
One person should lead the discussion. The choice of who
leads may rotate among all members who are old enough.
Another person should be responsible for keeping a written or
taped record of the proceedings. This task may also be rotated.
To stay on track during your family meeting, develop an
agenda, which is determined by what is happening in the
family. Any aspects of family life are open for discussion. It
also is a good idea to review the issues and accomplishments
from the previous meeting. This task can be rotated among
family members.
Set aside a
specific time so
that your family
can discuss
family life, current
issues, and
ongoing events
(both happy
and unpleasant),
and share in
decision-making.
31


32 FAMILY LIFE
The Family Meeting.
Ground Rules
The topics should be about situations, not individuals. For
example, phrasing a question as, “How can we make sure to
get the trash out before the garbage truck comes?” rather than
“How can we get Brent to take out the trash?” will help pre-
vent anger and hurt feelings. Avoid bringing up old hurts
or disagreements or turning the meeting into a gripe session.
Family members must listen without interrupting. Having
family members hold up a card or raise their hand when they
wish to speak may be useful. Everyone must be treated with
respect and must avoid making criticisms or judgments.
It is fine to discuss complaints, but the person raising the
issue should try to offer a suggestion for a solution. Having a
family suggestion box with ideas can be helpful.
Use a drop box
for current issues
and hot topics.
Talk about any
critical items first,
then take turns
drawing for the
other topics to
be discussed
that week.
Posting an agenda that can be
modified if necessary is a good
idea. Having this agenda in a
visible place also helps family
members know what to expect.


FAMILY LIFE 33
.The Family Meeting
The Problem-Solving Process
Identify the problem. Be sure that everyone understands exactly what
the issue is and the feelings that it evokes. Be sure to put the issue
into words.
Identify options. Come up with different ways the problem might be
solved. All family members can generate ideas. Use a suggestion box
if you have one.
Evaluate options. Decide on the strengths and weaknesses of each idea.
Consider whether a suggestion is realistic, whether it solves the main
problem, and whether family members are happy with this solution.
For each option, determine the possible consequences.
Choose the best option. The right choice may become very clear as
you review and evaluate the options. You may need to use a process
of elimination to choose the most suitable option.
Make a plan. Decide on steps that need to be taken to put the chosen
option into action. Consider who needs to do what and what resources
are needed. It also is a good idea to put your plan in writing.


34 FAMILY LIFE
The Family Meeting.
Conflict Resolution
You can use the problem-solving process to successfully resolve a
conflict. Bring the issue out into the open as soon as possible. Keep
emotions under control, and make sure everyone sticks to the issue
and avoids blaming, name-calling, and making accusations.
Many topics may be addressed in a family meeting. For
the purpose of earning the Family Life merit badge, here are the
necessary topics of discussion for your family meeting. These
are usually of concern to every family, but you may add to this
list with other topics important to your family.
• The dangers of drugs and substance abuse (how to avoid
using drugs, recognizing signs of substance abuse)
• Understanding the growing-up process, how the body
changes, and making responsible decisions concerning sex
• How helping with chores contributes to your role in the family
• Personal and family finances
• Crises within the family (various types)
• Whom might the family turn to in such crisis situations to
provide additional support
• The effect of technology on your family (the impact of
computer and email use; mobile phones; the advantages,
disadvantages, and abuse of technology)
• The importance of showing good etiquette and manners to
your family and all others
Before the close of the meeting, have each person state at least
one good thing that is happening within the family. End the
meeting by reviewing the discussion and the tasks at hand.


FAMILY LIFE 35
.The Family Meeting
Zoom Family Meetings
Zoom and other video-conference technology enabled many
families to meet together remotely during the COVID-19
pandemic.
Aside from the pandemic, these platforms could be helpful
for families separated by long distances, such as a parent
serving in the military or on an extended business trip, an
older sibling in college, etc.
Video conferencing also creates an opportunity to reunite
with more of your extended family, making it easy to reconnect
with aunts, uncles and cousins. The biggest winner could be
a lonely grandparent who is craving interaction with all of his
or her loved ones. The high point of their week could be the
chance to hear about some new great Scouting adventure from
their grandchild.
Having regularly
scheduled family
meetings gives all
family members
an opportunity
to discuss their
concerns, share
news, and make
suggestions.
Putting yourself in someone else’s place is called empathy.
Many leadership skills you will learn and practice in
the family meeting, such as conflict resolution and
problem-solving, will serve you in other situations
throughout your life.


Choose your friends carefully. Practice refusal skills. Do not apologize for saying
no and suggesting other activities. If your friends are not Scouts, maybe they
would benefit from joining Scouts BSA.


.The Dangers of Drugs and Substance Abuse
The Dangers of Drugs
and Substance Abuse
Peer pressure can be a big influence in your life. Everyone
wants to be liked and accepted by friends, but you should be
cautious about the price you could pay for popularity. Some
people may think that they can become popular by trying
cigarettes, alcohol, or drugs. Doing so will not make you
popular, build your confidence, or solve problems. What these
things will do is harm your mind and body.
Abusing substances is not cool. It does not make you
popular or adult, and it hurts the people who love you. If your
friends want you to use drugs, then find new friends who care
about what happens to you. There are better ways to have fun.
Teens consume
and abuse
alcohol more
than any other
drug. Alcohol
is a drug—a
dangerous one—
and its use by
minors is illegal.
Harmful substances can affect your mood, concentra-
tion, and memory. They also can
• Interfere with learning and impair your performance
in school.
• Cause behavior problems, mood changes, and
sleep disturbances.
• Slow you down and impair your ability to
think clearly and make sound decisions.
• Interrupt healthy physical
development and limit your
athletic abilities.
• Lead to the physical and
emotional abuse of
other family members.


38 FAMILY LIFE
The Dangers of Drugs and Substance Abuse.
Drugs and alcohol affect different people in different ways.
Having a drink may make one person happy and energetic or
funny, while another person may become verbally abusive or
physically aggressive. It is easy to identify a heroin addict or a
drunken driver as someone with a substance-abuse problem,
but substance abuse is not always so extreme. As a matter of
fact, it often is very subtle.
Here are some signs to help you recognize a substance abuser.
• Physical changes such as dilated pupils, flushed skin,
and a tired, sloppy, or disheveled appearance
• Behavioral changes such as moodiness, irritability, unreason-
able bursts of temper, or wanting to be alone much of the time
• A change in friends
• A change in study habits often accompanied by falling
grades or truancy
• Irregular eating habits
• Memory lapses and blackouts
• Evidence of drug paraphernalia
• Loss of interest in activities previously enjoyed
• Changes in sleep patterns
If someone you know is using drugs, talk to a respected
adult to get help. There are many resources available to help
with these kinds of situations. Al-Anon, for example, helps those
who are dealing with an alcoholic family member or friend.
Tobacco: It’s Poison
Cigarettes can contain dozens of dangerous and cancer-causing
chemicals, including arsenic (used in pesticides and weed
killers), benzene (a toxic solvent), formaldehyde (used to
embalm corpses), and polonium 210 (a highly radioactive
element). The blood carries the poisons from smoking to all
parts of the body. These poisons damage internal organs from
the brain to the bladder.
Scientists now know that smoking causes cancers of the
mouth, the larynx (voice box), the lungs, and the kidneys.
It can also cause a type of leukemia—a cancer of the blood.
You might have heard that smoking causes heart disease, but
did you know that it raises the risk for stroke and damages the
body’s ability to fight infection? Smokers are at high risk of
dying from any number of tobacco-related diseases.
Smokers can
find it extremely
difficult to stop.
Tobacco contains
nicotine, a highly
addictive drug.
Many smokers
who want to
break their
addiction must
try repeatedly—
and suffer the pains
of withdrawal
each time—
before they can
stop for good.


FAMILY LIFE 39
.The Dangers of Drugs and Substance Abuse
Secondhand smoke is exhaled by smokers or given off
by burning tobacco and is inhaled by people nearby. It
contains dangerously high levels of many of the poisons
and cancer-causing chemicals found in cigarettes,
including ammonia and carbon monoxide. Breathing in
other people’s smoke can cause lung cancer and heart
disease. Secondhand smoke is especially hazardous for
babies and young children. It increases their risk of
asthma, chest infections, and even sudden infant death
syndrome (SIDS)—the death of an apparently healthy
baby, usually while the child is sleeping. If there are
smokers in your family, encourage them to stop, for their
own sake and for the health of other family members.
What is Bad About Vaping?
E-cigarettes are electronic devices that simulate tobacco smoking.
Instead of smoke, the user inhales a chemical vapor. This is often
called “vaping.” This vapor can contain chemicals such as propyl-
ene glycol, glycerin, nicotine, and other toxicants and carcinogens.
Both the American Heart Association and the Mayo
Clinic have found nicotine is a dangerous and highly addictive
chemical. It can cause an increase in blood pressure, heart
rate, flow of blood to the heart, and a narrowing of the arteries
(vessels that carry blood). Nicotine might also contribute to the
hardening of the arterial walls, which can lead to a heart attack.
Use of e-cigarettes can lead to tobacco smoking and be
more addictive than tobacco. Researchers have found that
using e-cigarettes may lead to inflammation of the lungs.
Vaping-associated lung injury (VALI) describes various diseases
from the use of e-cigs that can be severe and life-threatening.
How Bad is Marijuana?
Another substance is marijuana (“weed” or “pot”). It is
a psychoactive drug that comes from the cannabis plant.
Tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) is the main psychoactive component
of cannabis. It can be consumed by smoking, vaping or eating.
Cannabis is mostly used recreationally or as a medicine,
although it might also be used for spiritual purposes. It is the
most commonly used illegal drug in the world. Even in areas
where it is use has been legalized, use by minors is still illegal.
The American Academy of Child & Adolescent Psychiatry
notes that this substance is especially harmful to children and
teenagers for its adverse effects to the developing brain.
Using e-cigs, or
vaping, can cause
severe and life-
threatening
diseases. As of
February 2020,
there have been
2,758 cases with
64 confirmed
deaths linked to
vaping.





FAMILY LIFE 41
.Family Matters
Family Matters
All families have ups and downs, but strong families know the
importance of sticking together—especially during the tough
times. Family members need to learn how to support one
another and keep family goals in mind.
Crises Within the Family
Crises are experiences or events that cause major changes in
someone’s life and may leave the persons affected unable to
function normally. Even if just one person is directly affected,
a crisis can affect all members of the family. The crisis may
cause additional stress when
• There are a number of other stressful events occurring at the
same time.
• A number of family members are involved in the crisis.
• The family has difficulties identifying, relating to, and
handling the event.
• The resources available to the family for dealing with the
crisis are limited or not easily accessible.
Crises can affect a family adversely and often are unex-
pected. It is important to understand the situation and help
your family seek solutions. The family meeting and problem-
solving process might be very useful at this time. A Scout can
also be useful in these situations by knowing where to get help
or find support from family, friends, or community resources.
Examples of crises can include a death, a damag-
ing storm, or a burglary. Other stressful events that
can affect an entire family include moving to a new
house or state, the loss of a parent’s job, or unex-
pected events such as a divorce or serious illness.
Some resources
that may be useful
in dealing with a
family crisis
would include
therapists,
psychologists, and
family counselors.


42 FAMILY LIFE
Family Matters.
Some young
people spend
more time playing
computer games
than taking part
in outdoor or
more active forms
of recreation.
Another negative
development is
the temptation
to investigate
forbidden web-
sites or become
acquainted with
unprincipled or
dangerous people.
The Effect of Technology
on Your Family
A unique cause of stress in today’s family is the impact of
technology. Technology can help make life easier. For example,
you might use the family computer for schoolwork or to keep
in touch with friends and relatives. Your grandparents may be
thrilled to get emails from you on a consistent basis. But bear
in mind that spending a lot of time on the computer can take
time away from other important activities.
Cell Phone Dos and Don’ts
If you have a cell phone, use it wisely and respectfully.
Do not use the phone while you are driving, and never text
while driving. Keep your mind on the road and your hands on
the steering wheel. Car crashes are the leading cause of death
among American teens, and you don’t want to contribute to
that statistic.
When you are out shopping or dining in a restaurant, be
considerate of others. Turn off your cell phone, or set it to silent or
vibrate mode. When you are talking or eating with others, don’t
interrupt the conversation or the meal by answering your phone.


FAMILY LIFE 43
.Family Matters
If you must use your phone in a public place, respect other
people’s personal space and your own privacy. Keep the conver-
sation quiet and short. If you can, step away from others.
At school, follow the rules for cell phones. You may be
permitted to use a cell phone during breaks and after school,
but never during class. As the rules direct, turn off your phone
or set it to silent or vibrate only. Be responsible when using
your cell phone for taking photos. Be sure you have the
person’s permission.
Keeping these guidelines in mind will help you avoid some
of the pitfalls of technology.
It is disruptive and discourteous to talk on the phone
while the family is watching TV. If an incoming call is
not an emergency, wait and deal with it later.
Etiquette and Good Manners
Good manners matter, and the best place to practice basic
courtesies is at home. Wherever you are, treat others as you
would like to be treated, and follow these tips to help keep the
peace. Remember, a Scout is courteous.
• Say “please” and “thank you.” Show your appreciation
for others.
• Listen quietly and thoughtfully to others.
Do not interrupt while someone is speaking.
• Avoid raised voices, name-calling, and back talk.
• Be kind. Teasing goes too far when it causes pain or
embarrassment. Bullying is never acceptable.
• Think before you speak. If you are about to say something
hurtful, sarcastic, or smart-mouthed, stop and consider:
How do you feel when someone speaks to you that way?
• If you share a bedroom, share the responsibility of keeping
it neat and clean.
• If someone’s door is closed, knock and wait for permission
before entering.
• Wash your hands before eating. At the table, don’t burp,
slurp, or grab. Ask for an item to be passed to you; don’t
stretch across other people to reach for it. Chew with your
mouth closed.
Being courteous
makes life more
pleasant—both in
families and in the
larger community.
Keep in mind that
people are more
likely to want to
be around and
work with
others who
are courteous.


44 FAMILY LIFE
Family Matters.
• Don’t spend more than your fair share of time in the bath-
room. Clean up after yourself by doing things such as hang-
ing up your towels and putting away your dirty clothes
where they belong.
• Don’t play your music so loudly that it disturbs others.
• When you say “I'm sorry,” be sincere. Mean it.
When you follow the basic rules of etiquette and good man-
ners, you cut down on daily irritations and help to avoid hurt
feelings. You also learn how to talk in a respectful and confident
way. Good social skills will serve you well throughout your life.
Etiquette Outside the Home
Good manners are not complicated; kindness and common
sense will see you through most situations. However, in any con-
fusing situation, let your good intentions be known. Show your
good will and, if you are not sure how to behave, ask for help.
People will appreciate your thoughtful efforts to be courteous.
• When you meet someone, it is always appropriate to
smile and say hello.
• If you meet someone from a foreign country, find out how
the person prefers to be addressed. Americans tend to call
everybody by their first name, but in many cultures such
casualness is offensive. Show respect by using the person’s
title (Mr., Mrs., Dr., etc.) and last name.
• Be hands-off—don’t touch until you know what is expected
or acceptable. In some cultures, people greet each other or
show affection publicly with a hug or a kiss. Other tradi-
tions may forbid touching. Similarly, ask before you touch
or move a person’s wheelchair, cane, or other personal
equipment. If a person with a disability appears to need
help, offer before you give it. If the person accepts your
offer of help, wait for instructions or ask how you can help.
• If the person offers a preferred pronoun, be sure to use it
when interacting with them.
These few examples cannot cover every situation you may
encounter. But they can help you see why it is always good to
follow the Scout Law: A Scout is trustworthy, loyal, helpful,
friendly, courteous, kind, obedient, cheerful, thrifty, brave,
clean, and reverent.
Respect
differences. Do
not belittle people
because of
their looks, abilities,
achievements,
opinions, or
personal tastes
and styles.


FAMILY LIFE 45
.Family Matters
Youth and Gambling
Problem gambling can result in increased delinquency, poor
academic performance, higher rates of truancy and dropout,
disrupted relationships, even drug and alcohol abuse.
Saving and Avoiding Debt
One of the most important lessons to learn early about
managing money is how much is OK to borrow when making
a big purchase such as a car, house, business start-up or a
college education. Borrowing too much will have serious
consequences later when you try to provide financial security
for your own family. Whenever you borrow money from the
bank, have a clear idea of how you are going to pay it back.
Avoid having a mountain of debt after you leave home.
Look for ways to earn money with part-time jobs, saving a por-
tion of your earnings. You might consider working for a year
or two before starting college. In some cases, your parents and
extended family might be able to provide financial assistance.
Start early to prepare to earn scholarships and government
grants (money for college that does not require repayment).
Have your parent or guardian fill out the Free Application
for Federal Student Aid (FAFSA) each year for federal student
aid. Many non-federal scholarships also require this.
The National Eagle Scout Association and many other
organizations award scholarships every year to Eagle
Scouts who have excelled in school, Scouting activities, and
community service, and who demonstrate they understand the
fundamentals of service to community and service to Scouting.
Respect property,
personal space,
and privacy. Ask
before borrowing
anything that
belongs to a
family member.
Return the item in
the same or better
condition. Stay
out of backpacks,
wallets, mail,
diaries, dresser
drawers, or
anyplace else that
is the personal
domain of a
family member.
Etiquette Around the Globe
If you will be traveling to another country, you may
want to research beforehand what is considered
polite behavior there. In some cultures, touching
someone on the head, showing the sole of your foot
or shoe, and eating with your left hand are consid-
ered unlucky, disrespectful, or unclean. Pointing with
your finger is considered rude nearly everywhere.
Various hand signs or signals may be acceptable in
some countries and forbidden in others.





FAMILY LIFE 47
.Understanding the Growing-Up Process
Understanding the
Growing-Up Process
During this time of your life, your body will change more
rapidly than it ever will again. This stage of life, between child-
hood and adulthood, is called adolescence. It is an exciting
time, yet it can be frustrating, too. One minute someone may
tell you that you are too old to do something, and the next
minute they may say that you are too young for something else.
This time of your life is called puberty. Your hormones
(chemical substances in your body that control growth, develop-
ment, and reproduction) reach a very high level. This phase will
start at different times for each person, and, on average, will last
about three years. At times you may sometimes feel like you are
on an emotional roller coaster. Your feelings will vary from highs
to lows within minutes. Don’t worry. This is a normal part of
growing up.
You also will experience intellectual changes.
You will learn how to solve more complex
problems, face more choices, and make more
difficult decisions. The choices that you make
are important because they will lead to actions
that affect your life and the lives of other family
members. With every choice you make there
is a consequence. Using the problem-
solving process can help you make
wise decisions.


48 FAMILY LIFE
Understanding the Growing-Up Process.
Suppose you want to decide whether to try out for the high school
swim team. Here is how you could use the problem-solving process to
help you make a decision.
Identify the problem. Should I try out for the swim team?
Identify the options. I could try out for the team. I could not try out for
the team.
Evaluate the options. In this case, it is helpful to make a list of pros and
cons, also known as consequences.
Pros
• I would get exercise on a regular basis.
• It would be fun.
• I would be part of a team and learn the value of teamwork.
• I would win the respect and admiration of my family and friends.
• I probably would make new friends.
• It would improve my self-discipline.
• It would be an activity I could list on college applications.
Cons
• It would be an additional expense for my family.
• I would have less time for family and friends.
• I would have less time for homework and other school activities.
• I would have less time for household chores.
• I might get injured.
• There could be a lot of pressure to perform well.
• I might feel embarrassed if I do not perform well.
• I would be disappointed if I did not make the team.
Choose the best option. As you evaluate the pros and cons, the right
choice probably will become clear.
Make a plan. If you choose to try out for the swim team, decide which
steps you need to take and what resources are needed to participate.
Put this plan in writing and share it with your family.
Considering all the consequences, options, pros, and cons helps
you see the big picture. It gives you a good foundation for making
wise decisions.


FAMILY LIFE 49
.Understanding the Growing-Up Process
Friendships
During this time in your life, you also will change and grow
socially. Friendships are important and will enrich your life.
A good friend is one who accepts you for who you are and
seems to bring out the best in you.
This is a time in your life when you will begin to consider
dating. One of the first steps in dating is going out together
in groups. This can be a lot of fun and helps build an under-
standing of how to get along better with others and to develop
social skills. Do not let anyone pressure you into being paired
off with someone. There will be plenty of time for this when
you are ready.
Dating someone might help you
• Understand different points of view.
• Develop social skills and friendships.
• Develop the positive aspects of your personality.
• Identify those traits you would like in your future spouse.
Making new friends and getting along as part of a group is a wonderful
experience. Some of these friendships will last a lifetime.


50 FAMILY LIFE
Understanding the Growing-Up Process.
Abstinence & Responsible Sexual Behavior
These days, sexual situations appear on television and in the
movies, on the internet, in music, and in advertising. These
messages could lead you to believe that the decision to engage
in sexual activities is no more important or serious than
deciding what to wear. This could not be further from
the truth.
Successful relationships are based upon
foundations of trust and devotion to one another.
Sexual activity can lead to a relationship based upon
physical attraction and not the deeper feelings that
can bring fulfilling happiness.
As you grow older, you will look back on
decisions you made and activities you engaged in
during your lifetime. Strive to make decisions you
will always be proud of.


FAMILY LIFE 51
.Understanding the Growing-Up Process





FAMILY LIFE 53
.Your Future Family
Your Future Family
Many factors help couples determine their readiness for mar-
riage and family life. Some of these factors are listed below,
but one of the most important things to remember is that
marriage is a long-term commitment. Strong marriages form a
solid foundation for a strong family.
The ideal situation is to find someone with
whom you agree on important issues such as
religion and ethics.
Other factors to consider:
• Age
• Social experience
• Emotional maturity
• Financial security
• Education
• Long-term goals


54 FAMILY LIFE
Your Future Family.
It is important to talk openly and honestly before
marriage. Waiting until you are married to bring
up issues, such as not wanting to have children or
wanting to move to another state, may leave you
wondering why you married this particular person.
People often are on their best behavior when dating.
Some people want to avoid conflicts, so they do not
speak their minds. This is not being totally honest. It
is better to be realistic and get important issues out
in the open before you commit to marriage.
Issues to Deal With in Advance
Insisting on doing things the way your family always did them
is bound to cause problems. As you establish your family
and set your own pattern as a married couple, you will need
to compromise. Imagine two people trying to build a house
together with two different sets of blueprints. In a marriage
you will need to formulate a plan that you create together as
a team.
Trying to make someone change
after marriage does not work. If
there are things that irritate you
about the person you want to marry,
these sources of irritation may
deepen after you are married. Do not
marry someone with the idea that
this person will change later. It is not
likely to happen.
You must study, practice, and
take a test before you can receive a
driver’s license. Unfortunately, the
same does not apply to getting mar-
ried and having children—yet these
are two of the most important
things you will ever accomplish.
Marriage and parenting are not easy.
There are challenges, but there are
great rewards.


FAMILY LIFE 55
.Your Future Family
Parenting
Being a parent is one of the most exciting things you will ever
do. You will have joys, laughter, and sometimes worry and sad-
ness. All this is part of the important role you will play in helping
to shape another person’s life.
Having children is a lifelong responsibility. Children are won-
derful and can make life more rewarding. For example, the first
time your child smiles at you or has his or her first day of school,
you will feel great pleasure. By the same token, children are hard
work. They are your responsibility every day, all day. If you are
tired, sick, in a bad mood, or out of money, they will still need
you to love them and take care of their needs. The factors that
help determine readiness for parenting are similar to those for
marriage. In addition, you and your spouse will need to
• Want a child.
• Be in good health.
• Be emotionally mature.
• Be partners in a strong marriage.
• Have enough time, space, and money to raise a child.
Addressing all these factors will give you both a strong
foundation for starting a family.
A good way to help prepare for your future role as a parent is to
babysit young children. Check with your city or local American
Red Cross for classes on babysitting.


56 FAMILY LIFE
Your Future Family.
Research shows
that children
with involved
fathers do much
better in life.
They have better
self-esteem and
fewer problems
in school. They
also are less
likely to engage
in substance
abuse, crime,
and violence.
Being an Effective Parent
As a parent, you will play an important role in your child’s life.
You will be your child’s role model. You will be the example
for your child of what parents are like.
To be an effective parent, you must have a good relationship
with your spouse, be ready to parent, and really want to have
children. You will need to be involved in your child’s life and
concerned with his or her physical, emotional, social, and moral
well-being.
Responsibilities of Parenthood
There are many responsibilities that you will need to share
with your spouse when you become a parent. Learning about
them will better prepare you for this important role. See if you
can think of other things to add to this list.
Taking care of physical needs. Children need food, clothing,
and shelter. As a parent you will need to make sure that your
children have enough nutritious, properly prepared food. For
example, hamburger that is not cooked thoroughly may pose an
extreme danger to young children. You also will need to be sure
that your children’s clothing is adequate for your climate.
Providing love and emotional support. Your children will
need to know your love for them is unconditional. You should
never say anything like, “If you don’t behave, I won’t love you
anymore.” There are ways to discipline children without threat-
ening to withdraw your love. Children need to know that you
always love them even if you do not like their behavior.
Offering guidance and discipline.
Every child needs guidance and discipline. Children
want and need limits to help make them feel safe
and secure. Think of it as letting a child play in a
backyard with a fence. The child can play freely in
the yard but it is protected by the fence. When you
set limits for your children, you are protecting them
and giving them freedom at the same time. It will
be up to you as a parent to guide your children by
setting limits and teaching them right from wrong.


FAMILY LIFE 57
.Your Future Family
Providing protection. It will be your role as a parent or
guardian to be sure that your children are safe and protected
from dangerous situations. You must know where they are
at all times and that they will be safe in your home, car, and
other places where they are under your care.
Providing economic support. As a parent or guardian, you
will be responsible for the financial support of your children.
Children cost money—lots of it. Just think of how much your
parents paid for your last pair of sneakers or your music
lessons. Parents sometimes have to give up things they
want to provide for their children’s needs.
Taking care of health-care needs. It will be important that
you can assure the health of each family member with ade-
quate medical insurance and periodic visits to the doctor.
You also will need to make sure your home provides a sanitary
and healthful environment.
Sharing resources such as time, talent, and ideas.
Your children will need your time and attention. You may
find yourself doing everything from helping build cars for
a pinewood derby to helping with math homework.
Parents or guardians need to understand, acknowledge, and support their
children’s feelings. For example, if your child is upset, it is better to say, “I
know you are feeling sad right now about your broken toy,” as opposed to
saying, “Don’t cry about such a silly thing.”


58 FAMILY LIFE
Your Future Family.
Teaching independence and responsibility. Just as you are now
learning to prepare for the future by sharing household responsi-
bilities, you will someday do the same for your children. You will
find that children as young as age 2 or 3 can begin to learn to
help around the house. You also will need to let them try things
on their own without interfering. This will build their confidence.
Can you remember what it was like when you learned to tie your
shoes? You probably were happiest when you could try it yourself
and learn from your mistakes.
Teaching social skills. You will serve as a role model by teaching
children how to get along in society through appropriate behavior.
Children need to be taught things such as how to behave around
other people, how to develop good manners, and how to treat
others with respect. They will follow your example. If you are
polite, they will follow your lead. If you are thoughtless and rude,
more than likely they will develop the same behavior.
Providing educational and recreational experiences. As a par-
ent or guardian, you will need to provide an environment that will
stimulate your child intellectually. This means reading and playing
games with your child as well as providing books and educational
toys. You also will need to show an interest and become involved
in your child’s education and recreation. A first step in becoming
involved could be to check on the quality of the school your child
will attend. Volunteering to help with school-sponsored events and
activities is a great way for parents or guardians to begin.
Playing sports with your children, for example,
or taking them on vacations or weekend out-
ings are all part of being an effective parent.


FAMILY LIFE 59
.Your Future Family
Teaching values. Parents or guardians pass beliefs
and values that are important to their family on
to their children. Think about the beliefs that are
important to you that you would want to pass
along to your children.
Nurturing spiritual well-being. Children usually
receive their religious training and principles to
live by through the family’s faith-based organiza-
tion. Involvement in a faith-based organization
promotes spiritual well-being and plays a major
role in keeping a family strong.
As a parent, you will set the example for how
your children’s faith is practiced in your family.
Preserving cultural traditions.
Every family passes on those traditions that will help preserve the culture and
heritage of the family. For example, as a parent you will probably want to celebrate
certain holidays the same way your family did.
Which family customs will you want to
carry on in your future family?
Your children will remember
more about the time you
spent with them than they will
about how much money you
spent on them.


60 FAMILY LIFE


FAMILY LIFE 61
.Family Life Resources
Scouting Literature
American Cultures, American Heritage,
Citizenship in the Community,
Citizenship in the Nation, Citizenship
in the World, Communication,
Cooking, Crime Prevention, Disabilities
Awareness, Genealogy, and Personal
Management merit badge pamphlets
Books
Beacham, Susan P. and Michael L.
Beacham. O.M.G.: Official Money
Guide for Teenagers. Money Savvy
Generation Inc., 2014.
Block, Joel D., et al. Stepliving for Teens:
Getting Along With Stepparents and
Siblings. Price Stern Sloan, 2001.
Carlson, Richard. Don’t Sweat the
Small Stuff for Teens. Hachette
Books, 2000.
Coleman, Ronda. Around the Family
Table: 365 Mealtime Conversations
for Parents and Children. Gryphon
House Inc., 2001.
Covey, Sean. The 7 Habits of
Highly Effective Teens. Simon
& Schuster, 2014.
Covey, Sean. The 7 Habits of Highly
Effective Teens Personal Workbook.
Simon & Schuster, 2014.
Eggerichs, Emerson. Love & Respect in
the Family. Thomas Nelson, 2013.
Fox, Annie. The Teen Survival Guide to
Dating & Relating. Real-World Advice
for Teens on Guys, Girls, Growing
Up, and Getting Along. Free Spirit
Publishing, 2005.
Gurian, Michael and Kathy Stevens.
Boys and Girls Learn Differently.
Jossey-Bass, 2010.
Gurian, Michael. The Minds of Girls:
A New Path for Raising Healthy,
Resilient, and Successful Women.
Gurian Institute, 2017.
Gurian, Michael. Saving Our Sons: A
New Path for Raising Healthy and
Resilient Boys. Gurian Institute, 2017.
Hightower, Elaine, and Betsy Riley.
Our Family Meeting Book: Fun
and Easy Ways to Manage Time,
Build Communication, and Share
Responsibility Week by Week. Free
Spirit Publishing, 2002.
Jukes, Mavis. The Guy Book: An
Owner’s Manual. Crown Books for
Young Readers, 2002.
Family Life Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


62 FAMILY LIFE
Family Life Resources.
Maisel, Eric. 20 Communication Tips
for Families: A 30-Minute Guide
to a Better Family Relationship.
New World Library, 2000.
McGraw, Jay. Closing the Gap: A
Strategy for Bringing Parents and
Teens Together. Touchstone, 2001.
McGraw, Jay. Life Strategies for Teens.
Touchstone, 2000.
Packer, Alex J. The How Rude!™
Handbook of Family Manners for
Teens. Free Spirit Publishing, 2004.
Packer, Alex J. How Rude!™ The
Teenagers’ Guide to Good Manners,
Proper Behavior, and Not Grossing
People Out. Free Spirit Publishing,
2014.
Perry, Philippa. The Book You Wish
Your Parents Had Read: (And Your
Children Will Be Glad That You
Did). Pamela Dorman Books, 2020.
Rosswood, Eric. Journey to Same-Sex
Parenthood: Firsthand Advice, Tips
and Stories from Lesbian and Gay
Couples. New Horizon Press, 2016.
Organizations
American Association of Family and
Consumer Sciences
1410 King Street, 2nd Floor
Alexandria, VA 22314
Toll-free telephone: 800-424-8080
aafcs.org
American Red Cross
431 18th Street NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: 800-RED-CROSS
redcross.org
American Red Cross
431 18th Street NW
Washington, DC 20006
Telephone: 202-303-4498
redcross.org
Family, Career, and Community
Leaders of America
13241 Woodland Park Road, Suite 100
Herndon, Virginia 20171
Telephone: 703-476-4900
fcclainc.org
National Council on Family
Relations
661 LaSalle Street, Suite 200
Saint Paul, MN 55114
Telephone: 888-781-9331
ncfr.org
Other Websites
Bright Horizons Family Solutions
brighthorizons.com/resources
KidsHelpLine
kidshelpline.com.au/


FAMILY LIFE 63
.Family Life Resources
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee for the
improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration
Credits
All photos and illustrations are
the property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Dan Bryant — page 13
Daniel Giles — pages 11, 19 (washing
dishes)
Brian Payne — cover (boy brushing
dog) and pages 15 (car washing),
19 (dog), 23
Randy Piland — page 24


64 FAMILY LIFE