FISHING


FISHING
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Fishing or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35899
ISBN 978-0-8395-0146-6
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing FPO


FISHING 3
Earning the Scouting America Complete Angler
Award could help you expand your fishing
knowledge and experiences. To become eligible for
the award, start by earning these three merit badges:
Fishing, Fly-Fishing, and Fish and Wildlife Management.
Then complete one or more of the following projects:
• Teach a Fishing or Fly-Fishing merit badge skill to your unit as part
of a program activity.
• Help instruct Cub Scouts on fishing skills or fishery management as
part of a Cub Scout meeting or outing.
• Participate in a local fishing derby or tournament, either a Scouting
or community event.
• Complete a conservation project that will benefit a local fishery.
With the Complete Angler Award, you can become a mentor for
younger Scouts, sharing your knowledge and helping others to enjoy
a positive fishing experience. For more information, visit
scouting.org/outdoor-programs/fishing





FISHING 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Safety Practices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
The Nature of Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Freshwater Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Saltwater Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43
Balanced Tackle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Fishing Gear and Craft. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 70
Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 76
Protecting Gamefish Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92
Fishing Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94


6 FISHING
Introduction.
Introduction
This pamphlet will tell you a lot about fish and how to catch
them. You might catch them for fun and “sport,” or to eat.
Fishing can become a lifetime pursuit, like golf or tennis.
Many kinds of fish are described here, along with many ways
to catch them—there are always new challenges in fishing,
and always more to learn. This is one merit badge you are
sure to enjoy earning from the very start.
As for beginnings, fishing has a long and interesting
history. As soon as early humans discovered that there
were fish in the waters and that the fish were good
to eat, they began to devise methods for catching
those fish. They quickly found that it was easier to
spear fish than to grab them with their hands. Later,
they discovered that they could catch even more fish
by using woven nets.
After observing fish while they were feeding, these early
peoples began catching fish by putting a sliver of bone inside a
bait with a thong fastened to the middle of the bone. When the
fish grabbed the bait and swallowed it, the piece of bone caught
crosswise inside the fish, allowing it to be pulled in. This birth
of angling, long before humans began recording history, led to
the invention of fishhooks, made first of bone and later of metal.
The initial intent of catching fish was to get food. However,
even early humans found that trying to outwit a fish with a line
and bait was an intriguing pursuit with considerable excitement
when a big fish latched on to the hook. Eventually, fishing
evolved into a sport, and anglers devised finer, lighter tackle,
making it more challenging to hook a fish and giving the fish
an opportunity to beat anglers at their own game. Thus was
born the sport of fishing, distinct from commercial fishing or
fishing for food.
Words shown in
bold print
appear in the
glossary near
the back of
this pamphlet.


FISHING 7
.Introduction
Baden-Powell’s Love of Fishing
Robert S.S. Baden-Powell, the founder of the Scouting movement,
claimed fishing as one of his favorite pastimes. As the Chief
Scout of the growing Scouting movement during the early
20th century, Lord Baden-Powell traveled the world to attend
jamborees and provide leadership and inspiration. Everywhere
he went, his fishing rods, reels, and fishing kit went with him.
Baden-Powell’s biographer E.E. Reynolds wrote, “When he
needed to get right away from everything and everybody, he
would go off for a few days’ fishing.”
In Scouting for Boys, Baden-Powell offers this advice to the
young fisherman: “Every Scout ought to be able to fish in order
to get food for himself. A tenderfoot [beginner] who starved on
the bank of a river full of fish would look very silly, yet it might
happen to one who had never learned to catch fish.”
It’s no surprise that fishing remains a favorite pastime on
Scout outings.
In his book
Lessons From
the Varsity of Life,
Baden-Powell
declares, “Trout
fishing is the best
rest-cure in
the world.”





FISHING 9
.Safety Practices
If the water is
too high or too
fast, go fishing
elsewhere. Try a
lake or a pond.
Safety Practices
When fishing, you might add to the Scout motto, “Be
Prepared,” the advice “Be Careful.”
Trip Itinerary
Always fish with at least one other person and always tell your
parents or guardian where you are going and when you expect
to return. If fishing in a remote area, leave your trip plan with a
resort owner or dock operator. If nothing else, leave your writ-
ten itinerary under the windshield wiper of your car. If you run
into trouble, trained searchers will know where to look for you.
Wading
Wading can be treacherous, particularly in the spring when
water is high or late in the fall when water is cold. Use a wad-
ing belt, as it can reduce the flow of water into your chest wad-
ers if you fall in. It is best to start wading in shallow water
before venturing farther out. This will help you gauge water
current and depth. It will also help if you wade diagonally
rather than launching into the current straight on.
Rock-bottom streams often are slippery. Experienced
anglers take small steps and wade slowly, moving one foot
ahead and feeling the bottom while supporting the body weight
on the other foot. Steel cleats or felt boot soles, where permit-
ted, sometimes help, as will walking around slippery rocks
rather than over them whenever possible.
A wading staff, tied to a wading belt with a thong, can
be a handy aid in fast water. If you lose your footing, you may
have to float downstream. Don’t panic; you won’t sink even
with your waders full of water. Float feet-first to fend off any
rocks, and work your way toward shallow and calmer water
where you can regain your footing.
Water level below dams can change rapidly when excess
water is released. Be aware of a siren signaling a water release,
or if you observe water change, retreat to safety.


10 FISHING
Safety Practices.
Boating
Weather is a chief concern when on the water. It pays to
check the forecast before venturing offshore and to keep an
eye out for threatening clouds, the signal to get back to
shore—fast. A responsible angler should learn the water and
carry an accurate depth map or cart, compass, whistle, mirror,
and other safety gear.
A serviceable boat repair kit is essential for emergencies.
Check running lights to make sure they operate properly. Learn
the boating laws of your state and those of the U.S. Coast
Guard. Know before you go!
Canoe Travel
The canoe is a superb craft for fishing but has special require-
ments for use. Never stand in a canoe. When fishing in heavy
waves or in fast currents, it usually is best for the bow angler to
do the casting and for the stern paddler to keep the craft under
control. It may be desirable to have an anchor made out of a
mesh bag filled with rocks. In streams, anglers sometimes use a
push pole, fitted with pointed steel “shoes” on the bottom. The
pole allows the craft to be moved upstream easily and also can
be used to snub up against rocks going downstream to hold the
canoe in place when fishing a particular spot.
Always be aware of the tides changing and of rapidly rising water.
Avoid alcohol at
the waterfront.
Despite the fact
that it is illegal for
anyone under 21
to drink alcoholic
beverages, alcohol
is a factor in half
of all drownings
among teenagers
and adults. The
death rate is
especially high
among young men
ages 15 to 24.


FISHING 11
.Safety Practices
It’s always a good
idea to carry an
extra paddle in
case one breaks
or is lost.
Sometimes it is advisable not to land an especially big fish
in the canoe. Instead, take it to the shore and beach it. Once
the bow is eased up on a sand or gravel bar, you can get out in
the shallow water where the fish gradually can be brought in
close enough to net. Be careful when landing any fish, because
spiny fins, sharp teeth, and sharp gill covers (such those on the
walleye) can inflict nasty cuts that may get infected. Any such
cut should be cleaned and covered with an adhesive strip.
Wise canoe anglers keep all extra gear lashed to the
thwarts in case of a spill. Inflatable camera bags and floatable
containers for tackle may help prevent an expensive loss.
A good flashlight or lantern will help you find directions in
the dark and is essential for signaling oncoming motorboats.
In any watercraft, either canoe or boat, you should always
wear a U.S. Coast Guard–approved personal flotation device
(PFD). Newer PFDs are less bulky than they used to be and do
not interfere with casting. There are fishing vests with inflatable
pouches that do not look like life jackets but serve the purpose.
Near-Drowning
Drowning is the third leading cause of accidental death in the
United States. You can prevent a near-drowning situation by fol-
lowing a few important safety practices.
Should your boat capsize, stay with the boat. It will be eas-
ier for rescuers to spot something the size of a boat than a per-
son treading water. In addition, you might be able to climb onto
the boat to await rescue.
Be sure you follow Scouting America’s Safe Swim Defense
plan on all Scout outings that include water activities (your
adult leader can review this with you). See the Swimming
merit badge pamphlet for more information about safe
swimming skills. Information on how to respond to a near-
drowning victim can be found in the First Aid and Lifesaving
merit badge pamphlets.
Whenever you are afloat or in the water,
remember to practice the buddy system
and follow Scouting America’s Safety
Afloat plan. Doing so will make your
outdoor adventure safer and more fun.


12 FISHING
Safety Practices.
First Aid and Fishing
For more detailed information on first aid, see the First Aid
merit badge pamphlet and the Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys or
Scouts BSA Handbook for Girls.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia is the lowered internal body temperature that
occurs when the body loses heat faster than it can produce it.
Water or air temperatures lower than 70 degrees Fahrenheit
pose hypothermia risks, and rain, moving water, wind, and wet
clothing substantially increase the loss of body heat. Any com-
bination of cool weather and damp clothing, wind, exhaustion,
or hunger can lead to hypothermia. In fact, most cases of hypo-
thermia occur when the air temperature is well above freezing.
The best way to deal with hypothermia is prevention.
Dress appropriately for the weather; always carry rain gear to
keep yourself and your clothing dry. Wear a hat and proper
footwear, eat plenty of energy-boosting foods, drink an adequate
amount of fluids (hypothermia increases the risk of dehydration),
and do not push yourself to a dangerous point of fatigue.
Dehydration
When we lose more water than we take in, we become dehy-
drated. Symptoms of mild dehydration include increased thirst,
dry lips, and dark yellow urine. Symptoms of moderate to
severe dehydration include severe thirst, dry mouth with little
saliva, dry skin, weakness, dizziness, confusion, nausea,
cramping, loss of appetite, decreased sweating (even with
exertion), decreased urine production, and dark brown urine.
For mild dehydration, drink a quart or two of water or sports
drink over two to four hours. Rest for 24 hours and continue
drinking fluids. See a physician for moderate to severe dehydra-
tion, which requires emergency care.
Heat Reactions
Protect yourself against heat reactions such as heat exhaustion
and heatstroke by staying well-hydrated. Drink plenty of water;
don’t wait until you are thirsty to drink, or it may be too late.
In hot weather, watch for signs of heat exhaustion (pale,
clammy skin; nausea and fatigue; dizziness and fainting;
headache, muscle cramps, weakness) and heatstroke (very hot,
red skin that can be either dry or damp with sweat; rapid
Monitor a
hypothermia
victim closely for
any change in
condition. Do not
rewarm the
person too quickly
(for instance, by
immersing the
person in warm
water); doing so
can be dangerous
to the heart.


FISHING 13
.Safety Practices
and quick pulse, noisy breathing; confusion and irritability;
unwillingness to accept treatment; unconsciousness). If you or
someone in your group shows signs of a heat reaction, get to a
cool, shady place. Have the person lie down with the feet,
head, and shoulders slightly raised, and remove excess clothing.
Cool the victim any way you can (cover the person with cool,
wet towels, or sponge the person with cool water; fan the per-
son; place the victim in a stream). Keep a close watch over the
victim. If you do not see a rapid recovery, seek medical atten-
tion right away.
Minor Injuries
It is a good rule of thumb to keep a first-aid kit with your
fishing gear. Use it to treat minor injuries such as cuts,
scrapes, and insect bites. For injuries in which the skin is
broken, wash the area with soap and water or clean it with
antiseptic to help prevent infection. Severe wounds need
immediate medical attention.
The bites or stings of insects, spiders, chiggers, and ticks
can be itchy and painful. Some can cause infection or even
Lyme disease. Applying calamine lotion may bring relief, but
the most important thing to remember is to try not to scratch.
Applying an ice pack to these injuries can help reduce swelling.
For a bee or wasp sting, scrape away the stinger with the
edge of a knife blade. Do not try to squeeze it out. That will
force more venom into the skin from the sac attached to the
stinger. Ice also will help ease the swelling of stings.
Sunburn
Most sunburns are first-degree burns, but prolonged exposure to the sun
can cause blistering—a second-degree burn. Sunburn is easy to prevent
by applying plenty of sunscreen and clothing with a sun protection factor
(SPF) rating of at least 30. Reapply if you are sweating and after you have
been in water. A broad-brimmed hat, long-sleeved shirt, and long pants
provide even more protection.
If you or a companion gets sunburned, prevent further injury by getting
out of the sun and into the shade. If there is no shade, put on a brimmed
hat, pants, and a long-sleeved shirt that will afford protection from the sun.
Treat painful sunburn with damp cloths. Remedies containing aloe vera
might also provide relief.
Many spider bites
can be dangerous.
Victims of spider
bites should be
treated by a
doctor as soon
as possible.


14 FISHING
Safety Practices.
If a tick has attached itself, grasp it with tweezers close to
the skin and gently pull until it comes loose. Do not squeeze,
twist, or jerk the tick, as that could leave its mouthparts in the
skin. Wash the wound with soap and water and apply antisep-
tic. After dealing with a tick, thoroughly wash your hands and
any affected area to help prevent Rocky Mountain spotted fever
or Lyme disease, bacterial infections that are spread through
contact with infected ticks. If redness develops in the bite area,
see a doctor.
Whenever you go fishing, taking a few precautions can
help make your outing a fun, safe, and comfortable
one. By anticipating what can happen (such as expo-
sure to cold or windy conditions), you can help prevent
and mitigate (lessen the impact of) just about any type
of mishap. You will also be in a better position to
respond quickly and appropriately should a mishap
occur. Remember to:
• Go with a buddy, and always tell your parents or
guardian where you are going, who is going with
you, and when you expect to return.
• Before heading out, check the weather forecast to
make sure the climate and conditions will be safe
wherever you plan to fish.
• Dress appropriately for the weather and activity,
such as using sunglasses, and wearing a personal
flotation device if you will be afloat.
• Drink plenty of water; stay hydrated in warm and
cool weather.


FISHING 15
.Safety Practices
Puncture Wounds
Puncture wounds can be caused by splinters, nails, and
just about any sharp object, including the sharp pectoral
and dorsal fins of some fish species. Such wounds are
hard to clean. To treat a puncture wound, use sterilized
tweezers if necessary to remove the sharp object.
Encourage the wound to help flush out dirt or other
particles. Clean the injury thoroughly with soap and
water and rinse well with clear water. Allow the wound
to air dry, and cover it with a clean, dry dressing.
Fishhooks also can cause a nasty puncture wound.
Always be aware of the path of your fishing rod and line
when you cast to prevent the hook from catching on
anything—especially another angler! Never try to
remove a hook that is lodged in the face or near an
eye, artery, or other sensitive area.
If you or someone else gets hooked, cut the line
to keep the hook from getting further embedded. If
only the point of the hook enters the skin and the
barb has not taken hold, you can safely remove the
hook by backing it out. If the barb becomes embedded,
it’s best to let a physician remove it. If medical help is
not available, try this method:
1. Tie or wrap a length of strong string or fishing line
around the bend of the hook.
2. Press down firmly on rear end the shank of the hook,
next to the bend, to free the barb.
3. Maintain pressure on the shank, and jerk firmly on the
string in the direction the hook entered.
If the barb is visible above the skin, use this method:
1. Cut off the barbed end with wire cutters or pliers.
2. Back the shank of the hook out through the entry wound.
After removing the hook, wash the area with soap and
water and cover it with a dry adhesive or gauze bandage.
For any puncture wound, be sure to see a physician about the
possible need for a tetanus booster shot and to help prevent infection.
Back out hook
if barb has not
taken hold.
1
2
3
1
2





FISHING 17
.The Nature of Fish
The Nature of Fish
Fish are highly specialized aquatic creatures, amazingly
constructed for living in water. Here are some interesting
facts about fish.
• They are cold-blooded—their body temperature is about the
same as the water around them.
• All fish are covered with a protective mucus or slime on top
of their scales.
• Scales are protective plates that cover the skin. When a scale
is lost, its “pocket” can become infected before the skin heals
and a new scale develops.
• Scales develop annual rings much like those of a tree.
A fish’s scales can help determine its age.
• The fish’s muscles and fins are designed to propel them
through the water in search of food and to help them
escape from predators.
• Fish breathe mainly through gills that absorb oxygen from
the water and circulate it into the bloodstream while
simultaneously removing carbon dioxide from the fish.
Most fish reproduce by the
female laying eggs that the
male fertilizes in the water.
Some fish reproduce through
live birth. The females of some
species might lay many
thousands of eggs, while some
other species lay only a few
hundred. Fish have the senses
of sight, taste, smell, hearing,
and touch, as well as other
special senses to help them
survive.
Some fish
species are
especially smart.
Any experienced
angler who has
tried to catch
the “old lunker”
that has lived in
the same pool
for years will
swear to that.


18 FISHING
The Nature of Fish.
Anal fin. Used for balance
and swimming.
Caudal fin. Used in swimming,
particularly when a fish needs a
quick thrust of speed.
Eye. Most fish have monocular
vision—each eye sees separately,
offering a wide field of view.
Gills. Respiratory organs used
for breathing.
Jaws. Bony appendages that
form a fish’s mouth. They may be
equipped with teeth so that a fish
can grip its prey while feeding.
Lateral line. A sensory organ that
detects sound and movement.
Pectoral fin. Used for stability,
locomotion, and steering.
Pelvic fin. Used for steering
and stability.
Scales. Transparent protective
plates growing from the skin
that can be replaced if lost.
Soft dorsal fin. Used for balance
and forward movement.
Spiny dorsal fin. The forward fin,
supported by sharp spines, is
used for balance. The spines also
protect the fish from its predators.
Parts of a Fish
GILLS (UNDERNEATH)
JAWS
EYE
SPINY
DORSAL FIN
SOFT
DORSAL FIN
SCALES
CAUDAL FIN
ANAL FIN
LATERAL LINE
PELVIC FIN
PECTORAL FIN
SCALE


FISHING 19
.The Nature of Fish
Toothy Fish
Beware! Some common fish that you may catch, like the
pike and pickerel in ponds, or bluefish in salt water, have
very sharp teeth. Do not “land” them by
grasping their mouth. Their teeth
are there for snatching
their prey—not your
fingers.
The Food Chain
As you practice the sport of fishing,
you will learn about the watery
world of fish, a complex environment
that provides the food fish eat. At the
bottom of the chain are plankton—
minute creatures that are eaten by
other forms of aquatic life, including
some of the fish. In freshwater,
there are countless insects that creep,
crawl, and live in the water, eventu-
ally climbing or flying out of the
water to mate, drop their eggs, and
start another cycle of life. Fish and
other creatures feed on these insects.
In the sea, phytoplankton, zooplank-
ton, small crustaceans, and smaller
prey fish form the basis of the food
chain for larger fish.


20 FISHING
The Nature of Fish.
Crayfish hide under rocks and eat anything alive or dead
they come across. Tadpoles swim in the shallows, developing
into frogs that live on the shorelines. Small fish, including
minnows, eat smaller forms of aquatic life and
in turn are eaten by larger forms. The lures
you use will imitate these forms of food.
The food chain starts with the
smallest being eaten by larger
creatures. In turn, those critters
are eaten by something else.
At the top of the chain are fish
and the creatures that feed
upon fish, including eagles,
ospreys, mink, otters, bears,
and, of course, humans.
Large predator
fish may eat
insects, frogs,
crayfish, and
other fish—even
members of their
own families.


FISHING 21
.The Nature of Fish
Reading Nature’s Signs
Locating lakes and streams where there are fish is easy. Every
state conservation department has lists or maps showing all
the fishing waters and which types of fish are in them. Tackle
shops, sporting magazines, and friendly anglers are your most
convenient sources of information on where to fish. Don’t be
shy in asking for information about local fishing spots. But
once on the water, where are the fish?
Fish Movement
Gamefish often come to the surface, sometimes
leaping clear out of the water for food. The
experienced angler searches for signs as to how
a fish is feeding—whether a fish is surfacing or
seeking food just beneath the surface. The angler
is alert to the flash of sun off fish scales under-
water or to the movement of a fish’s shadow.
Insect Activity
Insect life hatches continually year-round.
The appearance of insects such as mayflies and
caddis flies indicates that an abundance of larvae is
crawling and swimming below, which means that fish
are probably feeding on them.
Many freshwater
fish feed on insect
larvae year-round.
In saltwater, small
fish, worms, small
shrimp, and other
crustaceans sat-
isfy the same eco-
logical equivalent.


22 FISHING
The Nature of Fish.
Where to Find Fish
Fish can be found just about anywhere there is clean water.
Fish live in bodies of water as small as a pond or as large as
the ocean.
Ponds
Properly managed ponds can be high producers of fish,
providing excellent angling. Most ponds contain gamefish
such as bluegills and largemouth bass along the shoreline,
adjacent to weed cover, or in the colder deep waters. Ponds
are relatively easy to fish because they are small.
In hot weather, gamefish may seek the deeper areas.
Fishing at varied depths is one way to locate schools of fish.
Many ponds have bullheads or catfish living at the bottom.
These fish are relatively easy to catch on live bait fished
down to where they live.
A pond can have many species of fish at all depths.
Some pond
owners plant lily
pads or other
vegetation to
provide shade,
cover, and places
for fish to
congregate so
they will be
easier to catch.


FISHING 23
.The Nature of Fish
Lakes
Lakes are larger bodies of water and a popular place for
sportfishing. Most anglers can find several lakes within easy
driving distance that provide a variety of environments for fish.
Shallows. Most of the food and most of the cover, such as
weeds and sunken trees, are found near shore. Thus, most fish
at times will be found near the shallows, moving in and out to
feed. Some species, such as panfish and pike, tend to spend
most of their time in shallow water. Others, such as the bass
and walleye, move in and out at different times of day and
under different conditions of weather and temperature.
Breakline. The breakline is where the shallow waters drop off
toward the deep water. This is a place where many fish tend to
congregate, waiting for the opportunity to feed.
Structure. Rocks, ledges, reefs, bars, and sunken obstructions,
found in or near deep water, can be holding spots for fish
schools. These hangouts are used by various species between
times when they move up to the breakline or into the shallows
to feed.
Find out where
fish are most likely
to feed—their
“dining spot”—
and concentrate
your angling
efforts there.


24 FISHING
The Nature of Fish.
Streams
Stream fishing for trout and salmon has a special attraction
to anglers who learn to fish moving waters. The constant
movement of a stream presents a natural challenge for an
angler. Depending on the time of year, streams can be full of
trout or salmon returning from the sea to spawn. These fish draw
anglers from miles around to try their luck.
Rapids. Where water rushes into a pool, crashing down over
the boulders or thundering in from a waterfall, fish tend to
gather. These are places where food collects and can easily be
captured by the fish. Rushing water is highly aerated, which
creates a cool, oxygen-filled environment. Some fish such as
trout regularly live in such places, which are hatching sites for
a variety of insects that trout prefer for food.
Cutaway Banks. Fish tend to hide where stream currents
have carved holes under a bend in the shore, particularly
where there are trees and exposed roots. Deep, quiet channels
also are good spots to locate fish in streams.


FISHING 25
.The Nature of Fish
Big Water
With an environment as big as the ocean, you can
expect to find bigger fish. Deep-sea fishing for some of
the world’s largest species has become a popular
sporting pastime.
Surf. Some spectacular angling is available
on the edge of the nation’s two oceans and
along the coast of the Great Lakes. Long casts
require specialized tackle.
Surf fishing today is most often done with heavy-duty
spinning tackle, although some saltwater casting is done with
bait-casting outfits. Lures or baits require a long rod with plenty
of backbone to get out beyond the shallows to where the fish
lie. Surf rods are built with long handles for casting with two
hands, using a sweeping motion, overhead and to the side.
Hundreds of lures are designed to take the variety of sport
fish found in salt water. Various types of live bait and cut-up bait
also can be bottom-fished for saltwater species. In the Great Lakes,
surf angling is highly effective for salmon and trout. Chest-high
waders or hip boots may be necessary to get into the edge of the
surf, although in warm weather many wet-wade.
Extreme care
must be taken
when waves get
big, during tidal
movements
causing undertow,
or when slippery
rocks are present.


26 FISHING
The Nature of Fish.
Most saltwater anglers beach small fish and use a net to
land the larger ones so the fish can be released alive. Great Lakes
anglers most often use large landing nets, preferably with a
companion handling the net while the angler concentrates on
the fish.
Offshore. Trolling and still-fishing or drifting are the usual uses
of boats in salt water, the Great Lakes, and the nation’s big
impoundments. Offshore saltwater trolling for swordfish, tuna,
sailfish, shark, and other big species requires large fishing craft
and heavy tackle. Most of this type of fishing is on charter
boats with experienced guides.
A variety of saltwater fishing can be done with outboard
craft and medium-weight tackle for anglers who may troll, cast,
or bottom-fish. Party boats with experienced captains take large
numbers of anglers to reefs where gamefish are taken on baited
hooks dropped over the side.
Great Lakes trollers have specialized equipment—planing
boards and lead-weighted downriggers—designed to get lures
out to the sides of the boats or deep down. Sometimes the
boats are allowed to drift, with the anglers simply jigging lures
up and down or sending live bait to swim around below.


FISHING 27
.The Nature of Fish
Where Fish Hide
Fish hide for two principal reasons: to conceal themselves from
predators and to ambush unwary prey swimming past. In the
shallows, fish are found around weed beds, underneath
overhanging trees and brush, near docks,
and where rocks jut out from the shore.
In deep water, fish are quite often
found around clusters of big
boulders where they conceal
themselves in the shadows.
Factors Affecting
Fish Behavior
Since before recorded history,
anglers have studied fish,
trying to determine what
conditions cause fish to bite
more readily. There is a
definite correlation between
weather and fish action,
usually with a spurt of
feeding just before a weather
front arrives. A drop in
atmospheric pressure,
measured on a barometer,
can anticipate fronts. A
barometer measurement is in
inches of mercury, abbreviated
as inHg. Normal barometric
pressure is 30 inHg at sea level. Low
pressure is below 30 inHg, and high is
above 30 inHg. An approaching low, with
the barometer declining, often indicates an approaching storm.
Similarly, a rising barometer often indicates clearing weather.
Water temperature has a definite effect on fish. For instance,
many trout species cannot endure water temperatures much
greater than 70 degrees Fahrenheit for extended periods of time.
A sudden drop in temperature often will cause fish to stop biting.
This is quite common after a storm passes. Rising temperature
often causes fish to bite. In coastal areas, the tides have a strong
influence on fish behavior.
Sunken trees that have fallen into the water are
sure hangouts for almost all species of gamefish.


28 FISHING
The Nature of Fish.
Seasons
Spring usually finds the water cold but warming, with the best
fishing on the warmer days. Spring is when many species are
spawning, a time when they tend to strike lures quite readily.
More fish are caught in summer than in any other season.
It is a time when more anglers are fishing and also when the
water temperature is rising, speeding up the metabolism of fish
and causing them to feed more.
Fall can provide some excellent fishing, particularly when
there are warm days and cool nights. Cold fall days often are
not productive.
Winter usually is associated with ice fishing. Water
temperature under the ice is low but usually stable. Some
species of fish—trout, pike, perch, walleye, and panfish—bite
readily in winter.


FISHING 29
.The Nature of Fish
Why Fish Bite
Fish react to various stimuli, not all of which have been
determined. But when a bait or lure sets off the trigger,
the fish strikes.
All species of fish have certain times of the day
when they feed. Some of the periods seem to coincide
with phases of the moon and tides, some with weather,
some with time of day. Early morning and late evening
are usually times when fish are active, but there are
other times, even after dark.
In most instances fish bite because they
are hungry. As an angler, you will
imitate the kind of food you believe
will attract a feeding fish. Your lure
may imitate a minnow or a mayfly;
your style of fishing may be with
a spinning rod, bait-casting reel
and rod, or fly-fishing.
Schooling fish, such as white
bass, go on feeding frenzies,
chasing swarms of baitfish and
gulping down as many as they can.
Then they stop abruptly and cruise
along ignoring the same baitfish they
were chasing a few moments before.
Fish can be spooked or
turned off by the intrusion of
a noisy boat or a noisy wader,
by a badly presented bait
or lure, by too big a hook,
by a heavy line or leader that
may be visible, or by a
shadow falling on the water.
There is an old saying, “If you
can see the fish, they can see
you.” And sometimes they just
won’t bite, period.
Rainbow trout
Arctic grayling
With experience,
the angler learns
when and where
each species is
more apt to take
a bait or lure.





FISHING 31
.Freshwater Fish
Freshwater Fish
Lakes, ponds, rivers, and streams are home to many
hard-fighting species. Fishing can be done from the shore,
dock, while wading, or by watercraft such as a motorboat,
kayak or canoe.
Walleye and Perch
Walleye and perch are among
the finest gamefish
in North America.
The walleye, the
largest member of
the perch family, is
particularly prized because it grows to
a large size and is very tasty. Many anglers troll for walleye,
using minnowlike lures weighted down deep, jigs tipped with
live bait, spinner-and-bait combinations, or just live bait
with a slip sinker. Slowly trolling over sunken bars, alongside
ledges and weed beds, and over sand flats (particularly
those parallel to the breakline) can be effective.
In early morning and evening, walleye
may be taken by casting lures; excellent
catches of walleye can sometimes be
made late at night on slowly retrieved
crankbaits. Numerous walleye are
caught every year by still-fishing
live bait either on the bottom or with
a slip bobber.
Walleye


32 FISHING
Freshwater Fish.
Yellow perch are abundant
and willing to bite almost any-
time. These fish provide a
lot of action when a school is
located. The most popular
method of perch fishing is with
minnows, worms, or leeches on
a small hook below a bobber. Tiny
jigs, 1
⁄8 to 1
⁄16 ounce, with a piece of
worm on the hook, often do the
trick. In the spring, perch gather
where streams enter lakes
and where there are dams
in rivers. They may be
taken in large numbers with
a streamer fly or a small
spinner fished on a fly rod.
Sunfish
This year, a million American young people will be introduced
to the sport of fishing, and most of them will catch a species of
sunfish. There are seven families of sunfish. The most
common: bluegill, pumpkinseed, redear, warmouth, crappie,
rock bass, largemouth bass and smallmouth bass.
Sunfish include species that are called by dozens of
different common names throughout the U.S. and can be
referred to as panfish—aptly named, as many species of sunfish
are some of the tastiest in the frying pan. They also are fun to
catch, and some are ferocious battlers, despite their relatively
small size. In Southern states, sunfish are also called bream.
While perch are not great fighters, they are fun to catch
in large numbers and are a tasty fish fry.
White perch
Yellow perch
While panfish may be taken on almost any kind of
pole, line, rod, and reel, catching them on a fly rod or
ultralight spinning tackle is great sport. Panfish are
highly susceptible to flies and tiny jigs. They also bite
small panfish popping bugs, size 10 or 12, during the
warm months when insects are hatching.


FISHING 33
.Freshwater Fish
Bluegill and Similar Sunfish. The male
bluegill, like many of the sunfishes, has a
shiny, dark blue patch on the edge of
the gill cover. Also, like its sunfish
cousins, it is brightly colored. The
bluegill has purplish sides with black
bands and a bright yellow or orange throat. It
has a small mouth, so small hooks are required to
catch it. Bluegill are found just about all over the
United States and grow to 2 pounds, although
1-pounders are considered a trophy. They are among
the toughest fighters of the sunfish clan. While sunfish may be
taken on almost any kind of pole, line, rod, and reel, catching
these bantamweight warriors on a fly rod or ultralight spinning
tackle is great sport. Sunfish are highly susceptible to flies and
tiny jigs. They also bite small popping bugs,
size 10 or 12, during the warm months
when insects are hatching. Often while
targeting bluegills, Scouts may catch
other common sunfish—like pumpkinseed,
redear, and warmouth—that live in the same
areas of a lake or pond. Live bait such as worms
or crickets are very effective when fishing for
sunfish.
Rock Bass. The rock bass is a brassy-colored sunfish with
rows of black scales and distinctive red eyes. A stubby fighter
growing to 2 pounds that will strike almost any kind of live bait
or artificial lure, it likes to hang out around old bridge piers,
docks, boulders, and weed beds. Except in the late fall when it
goes deep, the rock bass is a shallow-water feeder that likes to
take minnows and bugs near the surface.
Crappie. White and black crappies grow
to 4 pounds, although a 2-pounder is
considered a trophy in most areas.
They feed mainly on small minnows
and insects and will take small
spinners, lures and streamer flies without
hesitation. Crappies are often found close to
structure. Be aware that crappies have a paper-like
mouth and must be fought and handled carefully so
that the hook does not pull loose. Crappies are excellent eating.
Rock bass
Crappie
Bluegill


34 FISHING
Freshwater Fish.
Largemouth Bass
No fish is more aptly named than the largemouth bass. Its jaw
extends well back past its eye, and when it opens its mouth to
swallow something, it seldom misses. Because of its ability to
take a wide variety of lures and because it often strikes explo-
sively on the surface, the largemouth is one of the most prized
and gamefish in North America. The first reels and casting rods
made in the United States were tailored to bass fishing.
Largemouth can be caught on bait-casting, spin-casting,
spinning, and fly tackle. They will hit topwater lures, crankbaits,
Woolly Worms, and bottom-bumping jigs. Weedless spoons and
spinnerbaits that will not snag on vegetation when fished
through the lily pads, often are productive. Realistic plastic lures
that imitate minnows, worms, crawfish, frogs, salamanders and
insects are effective. Largemouth also will hit live bait such as
minnows, frogs, leeches, and crayfish, which are life-forms that
are naturally found in their habitat and are part of their
accustomed diet.
In the South, largemouth can grow to 20 pounds or more.
In the North, 10 pounds is a record-breaker. Largemouth are
structure-oriented fish, meaning they hang around brush, fallen
trees, weedbeds, and ledges, usually in fairly shallow water.
Where they are heavily fished, they become cagey, and the
angler must be careful, quiet, and skillful to be successful.
Smallmouth Bass
Averaging between 4 and 6 pounds, the smallmouth bass has
been described as “pound for pound, the gamest fish that
swims.” Many anglers will argue for other species, but there
is no question that this snub-nosed, jut-jawed warrior of the
cold water is a foe to test the tackle of any angler.
Largemouth bass
Bass are a great
sportfish, and
many anglers
release the bass
they catch,
perhaps keeping
one or two small
ones for supper.
Small bass are
excellent eating;
big bass are not
as good.


FISHING 35
.Freshwater Fish
Smallmouth once were
confined to the eastern United
States but have been stocked
over all of the northern states,
much of Canada, and parts of the
southern U.S. Night crawlers,
leeches, minnows, frogs, and
hellgrammites (a type of aquatic
insect larvae) are all natural food for this fish. They also will hit
a wide variety of spinners, crankbaits, topwater lures, flies,
plastic worms, bugs, and jigs.
However, unlike the largemouth, which often will hit a
fast-moving lure, the smallmouth likes its bait moving slowly,
with frequent pauses and twitches. When it does strike,
however, it strikes like lightning. The battle is spectacular,
playing out as much above the surface as below. Its preferred
hangouts are fallen trees, underwater cabbage beds, rock
ledges, and deep boulder piles. In the spring, the smallmouth is
up in the shallows, but in the summer, it may be down 10 to 30
feet. In the late fall, the smallmouth schools at 40 feet.
Striped Bass
Striped bass are basically
saltwater fish that range along the
East Coast from Maine to Georgia
and are a favorite of anglers who
fish in the surf. Stripers have also
adapted to freshwater to become
a productive inland gamefish.
Striped bass are strong fighters and usually are taken on
light saltwater tackle. Most stripers are caught on live shad min-
nows, although casting heavy jigs, Clouser minnow flies, and
spoons can work well when the fish are feeding. Anglers locate
schools of stripers by watching birds circling baitfish chased to the
surface by feeding bass.
Smallmouth bass
The easiest way to distinguish the smallmouth from
its largemouth cousin is by the upper jaw. In the
smallmouth bass the jaw comes to a point just to
the eye. In the largemouth, the upper jaw ends behind
the eye. Also, smallmouth are yellow or tan with brown
markings. The largemouth is a greenish-gray color with
black markings. Both fish are known as black bass.
Striped bass


36 FISHING
Freshwater Fish.
Catfish
Smooth, tough-skinned, long, lean, and built for power, the
catfish family is widespread in North America. Catfish are found
in clear, icy waters of the North as well as the warm,
muddy streams and bayous of the South. They are
highly tolerant of water temperature fluctuations
and can withstand turbid water, even some
pollution. They are relatively easy to catch,
are fierce fighters, and make for fine eating
when properly prepared. Be careful: All
catfish have sharp spines in the pectoral
and dorsal fins that can cause a painful
wound to the unwary or careless angler.
Channel catfish are sleek and highly
prized. They can grow to 30 pounds or
more, but the average is 2 or 3 pounds.
Flathead catfish and blue catfish regularly
grow to more than 40 pounds, some reaching
100 pounds. The most common catfish is the
much smaller bullhead—a dweller of small
streams, ponds, and sloughs. Thousands of
bullheads are caught each year by anglers with no more
than a hook, line, and bait. Larger catfish are found below
dams, in riffles, beneath undercut banks and logjams, and in
deep holes and channels. The best way to catch them is to fish
the bait on bottom.
Bullhead catfish


FISHING 37
.Freshwater Fish
Pike must be
carefully handled
to avoid contact
with their teeth
and gill rakers.
The Pike Family
Big, sharp-toothed, and mean-tempered, the fish that make up
the pike family have a common trait: They strike first and ask
questions later.
Catfish Bait
Nearly any bait, alive or dead, will take a catfish. Channel cats, at times,
will strike a lure as savagely as a walleye. Some favorite catfish baits are
cut-up smelts or other small fish, worms bunched up on a hook, clam
meat that has been allowed to mellow in the sun, and crayfish tails.
Catfish also like liver, chicken entrails, and cheese. Commercial “stink
baits,” which have a strong odor, also are good.
CUT-UP SMELTS CLAM MEAT CRAYFISH TAILSWORMS


38 FISHING
Freshwater Fish.
Northern Pike. Most common is the northern pike, found over
a large part of North America. They may grow to 50 pounds.
All of the pikes prefer large, flashy lures such as spinners,
spoons, silvery floating-diving plugs, and noisy surface baits.
They strike big minnows and will readily take strips of sucker
meat or frozen smelts.
Muskellunge (Muskies). Biggest of the pike family, these fish
grow to more than 60 pounds. The true muskie is light olive
with brown spots. Hybrid muskies are light olive with brownish
stripes. The hybrids are muskie-northern pike crosses, called
tiger muskies. Muskies are not nearly as common as northern
pike and are not as easy to catch, so they are much sought after
as trophies.
Chain Pickerel. These are a smaller pike cousin, yet are more
commonly available. They are best caught during the day on
live bait or lures and are found in shallow, weedy lakes.
Members of the
pike family are
excellent eating
but are bony.
Northern pike
Muskellunge


FISHING 39
.Freshwater Fish
Trout
Trout are a cold-water fish, needing water of less than 70 degrees.
For sheer beauty, the members of the trout family are hard
to beat. They are sleek, without large scales, colorful, and
designed to swim in moving stream waters.
Brook Trout (Char). A dark-green back with yellowish
tracks, spotted sides with bright-red spots, red fins,
and a white underside mark this all-American
warrior. Brook trout are found anywhere
from tiny beaver ponds to the great
rivers of the North. In lakes it grows
to 7 or 8 pounds, but the average
brookie weighs less than a pound.
Rainbow Trout. Aptly named for the bright red streak down
its silvery side and its bluish-green back, the rainbow trout
is not only a handsome fish but also one of the most
spectacular leapers among freshwater species.
There are many varieties of rainbow trout,
some growing to more than 20 pounds.
The migratory steelhead, a fish
that spawns in streams but
spends most of its life in salt
water or the Great Lakes,
is a cousin.
Brown Trout. This European import has taken hold in many
of the warmer streams that will not support native American
species. It is stubbier than most trout, yellowish-tan with brown
and red spots, shy, and sometimes difficult to catch. Planted in
the Great Lakes, it can grow to more than 20 pounds.
All types of flies, small spoons, and spin-
ners are effective for trout fishing. Where
regulations permit, live bait for trout
includes worms, minnows, and insects.
Salmon eggs also can be good bait. When
caught, trout should be either released or
killed and kept in a creel (a special bag or
basket), not in warm water where they will
turn soft and deteriorate quickly.
Brook trout
Rainbow trout


40 FISHING
Freshwater Fish.
Lake Trout and Salmon
While salmon always have been a popular sportfish in saltwater
and in the coastal rivers, new fisheries occurred in the Great
Lakes when coho salmon were first stocked in Lake Michigan to
control the invasive alewife. There are now chinook and pink
salmon to catch in the Great Lakes, along with native lake trout.
Trolling
This is the most popular method of taking both lake trout and
salmon. Heavy-duty spinning tackle is most often used with
lures pulled behind the boat near the surface or down deep,
depending on where the fish are. Spoons and large, minnowlike
lures in a variety of colors—from blaze orange to fluorescent
green—are popular. Downriggers, wire lines with heavy lead
weights, are used to get the lures deep. Planing boards that
float and run parallel to the boat often are effective in getting
lures out to the side. Trout and salmon also may be taken by
drifting while jigging heavy jigs below the boat.
Casting
Anglers without boats take large numbers of salmon and lake
trout by casting offshore on points and at the mouths of rivers.
In late summer, the salmon begin their fall spawning run. Lake
trout follow a short time later. Long rods, 9 to 10 feet, are used
with light saltwater reels to cast the lures far from shore.


FISHING 41
.Freshwater Fish
Thin ice can
be dangerous.
Your merit badge
counselor can
tell you more
about the hazards
associated with
ice fishing. Before
you go ice fishing,
check with
local conservation
officers for ice
conditions if
there is doubt
about safety.
Ice Fishing
When winter comes and the lakes freeze over, a different
type of fishing begins. Some species of fish—bluegill,
crappie, perch, pike, walleye, and trout—may be caught
readily through the ice.
The bulk of ice fishing is for species of panfish and
is done with lures. The lures are bits of chromed metal,
painted lead, or plastic designed to look like flickering
minnows or struggling insect larvae in the water. They
are used in conjunction with real insect larvae or tiny
minnows and are jigged near the bottom.
Pike, walleye, and trout usually are taken on larger
metal spoons, lures, and jigs baited with live or dead
minnows. Most anglers use regular spin- or bait-casting
reels on special, short ice rods. The drag is usually set
on the light side so that a large fish can be played with-
out the line snapping. Fish caught through the ice in
the winter can be put in the bucket or box seat to take
home. No fish, bait, or other trash should ever be left
on the ice.
The standard outfit for ice fishing includes short
rods; monofilament line; ice flies; spoons, lures, jigs, and
bait; an ice auger to drill holes; a skimmer to dip the
slush and ice chips out of the fishing hole; a bucket or
box to sit on; and plenty of warm clothing.





FISHING 43
.Saltwater Fish
Saltwater Fish
The ocean coastline, including the estuaries of rivers flowing in,
offers a variety of sportfishing from piers, wading the surf or
flats, casting from outboard skiffs, and trolling or bait fishing
from big water cruisers. Some of the larger trophy fish, such as
the tarpon, are wild
acrobats and fun to
catch but should be
released because they
are not particularly
good to eat.
Shallow-Water Species
The pompano and spotted sea trout are
two shallow-water species popular
with anglers. Pompano are among
the tastiest saltwater fish. They
also are frantic battlers and may
be taken by casting or trolling
small jigs or flies, plain or
baited with sand bugs.
Sea trout (sometimes called
weakfish) are abundant and
easily caught where they swarm
in coastal bays and lagoons
and at river mouths. Using drifting or casting jigs
baited with fresh shrimp is a surefire method. Trout also
will hit spoons, surface lures, and fly rod streamer flies.
Tarpon
Pompano


44 FISHING
Saltwater Fish.
California Yellowtail
This exciting fish, also called the
amberjack, may grow to more than
60 pounds, but the average is 10 to
20 pounds. Live sardines, cast or trolled,
are the most popular baits, although yellowtail
sometimes will hit trolled lures. They are considered a fairly
good table fish.
Snapper
A shallower-water fish that hangs around coral structures and
often invades southern coastal streams, the mutton snapper
runs from 5 to 20 pounds and is rated highly for food qualities.
Good fighters on light tackle, they strike jigs, flies, crankbaits,
and surface lures, along with shrimp and other live bait. They
have sharp teeth, and most anglers use wire leaders
for these fish. The red snapper, a deep-water cousin, lives
farther north and usually is caught on still-fished cut bait.
It is superb eating.
Yellowtail


FISHING 45
.Saltwater Fish
Catch and Release—With Care
Scouting’s founder, Lord Baden-Powell was an avid
angler and a pioneer of catch-and-release fishing. He
wrote: “When you catch your fish as I do—only keep
those you especially want for food, put back the others
the moment you have landed them.” Catch and release
prevents overfishing, helps lengthen the fishing season
and supports the conservation of fish.
• Use artificial lures with barbless single hooks. Fish
tend to swallow live bait more deeply, and barbless
hooks are easier to remove and generally do less
damage than barbed hooks.
• Play the fish, then release it as gently and quickly
as possible. Do not play the fish to exhaustion,
or it might not recover.
• If the fish has swallowed the hook, cut off the
line as close to the hook as possible. Never try
to remove a deeply embedded hook because you
may damage the fish beyond recovery or make
it a more vulnerable prey.
• Whenever possible, avoid removing the fish from the
water. Prepare your camera for pictures first; hold up
the fish for a quick photo, and release it immediately.
• Only use a landing net made of soft nylon or soft
rubber and not hard mesh, which can
damage the slime that covers the fish
and helps protect it from disease.
• If you must handle the fish, wet your
hands first. Dry hands will remove the
fishes’ protective (mucus) slime coat,
exposing it to disease. Support the fish
horizontally—never vertically—in the
water across the back and head, avoiding
the eyes and gills. Before releasing, revive
the fish gently by holding it facing the
current in streams or rivers or facing deep
water in ponds and lakes until it swims away.


A Scout with fishing professional Tom Redington.


FISHING 47
.Balanced Tackle
Balanced Tackle
When the rod, reel, and line are correctly matched to
handle lure or bait of a given weight, they are considered
to be in balance. When in proper balance, they allow
the angler to deliver the lure or bait with accuracy within
the desired distance. Modern tackle manufacturers are
continually experimenting and upgrading their rods, reels,
and lines to create more efficient tackle for easier casting.
Fly-fishing requires that the rod be balanced with
matching line, the reel mainly having the function
of line storage. Fly rods are usually marked with
numbers indicating which line works best on that
particular rod.
Balance also applies to the rod you select when you
target fish you hope to catch. Use a lighter rod for smaller
fish and a heavier rod to match better with larger fish.
Catching small fish on a heavier rod is not as much fun.
Similarly, catching larger fish on a very
light rod may lead to an overly
fatigued fish that might
die after release.
HAND GRIP
REEL SEAT
FERRULE
ROD TIP
BUTT GUIDE
TIP TOP GUIDE
BUTT CAP
REEL SCREW
AND CLAMP
FORWARD
GRIP
GUIDE
EXTRA FAST
FAST
MODERATE
SLOW


48 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Equipment used in saltwater fishing is much the same as
the equipment used in freshwater fishing except that every
piece of tackle designed for saltwater fishing is more resistant to
corrosion and is usually built on a larger scale: reels are hus-
kier; rods can measure from 8 to 11 feet long; and lines and
lures are heavier for handling many larger saltwater predators.
Tackle catalogs list rods and reels by weight and function,
allowing the angler to make informed choices. Tackle dealers,
tackle representatives at sport shows and demonstrations,
and experienced anglers are all good sources of information
on suitable tackle for the fishing of your choice.
The four types of reels most commonly used are the bait-
casting reel, closed-face spin-casting reel, open-face spinning
reel, and, for fly-fishing, the fly reel.
Fixed-Line Fishing
Fixed-line poles are a first fishing pole for many youth. A
fixed-line pole does not have a reel, and therefore is called a
“pole” instead of a “rod.” Cane poles are usually made from
dried bamboo. A crappie pole works the same way, but
instead of being a fixed length pole of natural material, crap-
pie poles typically telescope to a length from 10-16 feet, and
are made of fiberglass or graphite.
To cast a fixed-line pole, hold the pole in your dominant
hand, and hold the line with your other hand just above the
hook or lure. Lift the rod with a sweeping motion and release
the line to swing out. When the line is fully extended, bring
the rod tip down to place the hook in the water. This is called
a pendulum or swing cast. Combining the length of the pole
and the line allows you to place the bait where you want to.
Bait-Casting
Bait-casting is used by more experienced anglers. These outfits
are very accurate and casts over 50 feet are relatively easy
with practice and experience. The lure is flipped from the tip
of the rod, pulling the line from the reel. The reel is on top of
the rod and control of the cast is through use of the thumb on
the casting hand. The lure is then retrieved by turning the
reel’s handle. Bait-casting reels have a “level wind” mecha-
nism that keeps the line even across the spool. If the line is
not thumbed lightly during the cast there is a possibility the
Before casting,
always check
behind you—
you want to
catch a fish, not
another angler!


FISHING 49
.Balanced Tackle
line will overrun, creating a backlash.
An adjustable drag allows a hooked fish
to take line out under preset pressure so
that quick rushes will not break the line.
Bait-casting is done with a wrist
and forearm motion. The rod is held
with the thumb holding the line secure.
The rod is brought up sharply until ver-
tical, the weight of the lure bringing the
tip back to a one o’clock position. With
an almost continual motion, the rod is
stroked forward and the thumb releases
the line, allowing the lure to shoot for-
ward. The thumb should reapply pres-
sure as the cast reaches the desired distance and before the
bait or lure hits the water.
Spin-Casting
Spin-cast outfits are good for beginners because they’re rela-
tively easy to use. Spin-casting reels have a fixed housing
mounted on top of the rod. The reel has a push button which
holds and then releases the line during the cast. During the
retrieve, a pin on the rotating spinner head assembly winds
the line back onto a fixed spool. Spin-casting reels have an
adjustable drag that allows a preset pressure on hooked fish.
These reels are very accurate and useful in hitting small open-
ings in weed beds or around snags. However, learning how to
master these skills takes practice.
The motion of the cast is very similar to the motion of
throwing a paper airplane; the hand moves from just behind
the head in a straight line until the arm is extended. The rod
tip moves from being upright at the start to pointing forward
at the end of the cast. The thumb button controls the release
of the line. Pressing the button prior to the cast retracts the
pin on the spinner head assembly and clamps the line, so
once the button is pressed it needs to stay down until the
release. Timing of the release is key to a good cast. As the rod
moves forward the timing of the release allows the lure to
carry the line freely to the target. The spin-cast outfit is very
effective with live bait, artificial baits, lures and spinners.
Bait-casting


50 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Spinning outfits
also may be
used for trolling.
The preset drag
holds the line at
a tension that will
release on a strike
from a heavy fish
but will not
release because
of the motion of
the boat or the
pull of the current.
Spinning
Although almost nonexistent in the United States before 1940,
spinning has become a popular form of casting. The fixed-
spool reel is mounted under the rod. The line is controlled
with the index finger of the casting hand. The fingertip picks
up the line as the free hand moves the spring-operated pickup
arm, or bail, to one side. The rod tip is raised to vertical then
swept forward, the index finger precisely releasing the line as
the lure shoots out.
To stop the cast, the tip of the index finger touches the line
against the spool and then the free hand flips the bail pickup to
capture the line. The bail will flip automatically when the han-
dle is turned, but this is generally not recommended. A roller
on the bail lays the line back smoothly on the spool as the reel
handle is turned. A drag adjustment screw on the front or rear
of the reel controls the tension necessary to pull line from the
reel when fighting a fish. Spinning tackle ranges from heavy-
duty big-water outfits that require two hands to cast to ultra-
light combinations that weigh only a few ounces. Because there
is no movable spool, long casts can be made effortlessly with
spinning tackle. Tiny lures may be cast accurately on threadlike
lines and large lures may be cast long distances on the heavier
outfits.
Spinning Open-face spinning reel
LINE GUIDE
SPOOL
BAIL PICKUP
ROTATING HEAD REEL FOOT
REEL STEM
REEL HOUSING
ANTIREVERSE
REEL HANDLE
DRAG
ADJUSTMENT


FISHING 51
.Balanced Tackle
Fly-Fishing
When fly-fishing, the angler typi-
cally uses a long, flexible fly rod to
cast a plastic-coated line. The weight
of the line, not the fly, carries the fly
out. The fly imitates the prey upon
which fish regularly feed (mayfly,
caddis fly, stone fly, minnow, etc.).
Fly-fishing is a form of angling
dating back hundreds of years to its
origin in Europe. Early anglers had
limited resources and used a line tied
to the tip of a long, thin rod. Later a system of guides, fixed
along the rod, was devised so that extra line could be released
at the cast, allowing the fly to sail out much farther. A reel was
fastened to the lower, butt end of the rod as a place to store
extra line.
For the cast, a minimum of 15 feet of line plus the leader is
stripped out in front of the angler. The rod is brought upward
with smooth acceleration as the line is gripped firmly between
the thumb and index finger of the non-casting hand. The line
should sail upward and behind the angler in a loop. At that
point, the rod tip is stopped abruptly at approximately 30
degrees beyond top dead center waiting for the fly line to fully
unfurl behind the angler. At the precise moment the line is still
airborne and flat behind, the angler applies forward thumb
pressure moving the rod tip smoothly and firmly toward the
desired casting location. When the rod tip reaches approxi-
mately 30 degrees forward of top dead center, the angler
releases the fly line being held in the non-casting hand. With
practice, the excess line shoots out and pauses briefly over the
water, the leader straightens out, and the fly drops gently to the
water’s surface exactly where you believe a fish is likely to be!
Many anglers tie their
own flies for fly-fishing,
like this Woolly Bugger
fly. You can learn more
about fly-tying in the
Fly-Fishing merit
badge pamphlet.
REEL FOOT
REEL FRAME
RELEASE
BUTTON
ADJUSTABLE
DRAG KNOB
HANDLE
Standard fly reel
Fly rods are
limber and light,
weighing only a
few ounces. The
fly rod provides a
maximum amount
of leeway to a
fighting fish.
However, with
skill, even large
fish can be
played and
captured on
a lighter weight
fly tackle.


52 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Fishing Lines
Varieties of lines of different weights, diameters, and construction
are available, made for different types of fishing—fly-fishing,
spin-fishing, or bait-casting. Monofilament lines come labeled
as nylon, which floats, and fluorocarbon, which sinks. allowing
for different delivery of lures and baits. These lines come in
clear, which is almost invisible to fish, and in colored lines for
different conditions. Nylon and fluorocarbon monofilament
lines are used when using a fixed-line pole, a closed-face spin-
casting reel, or an open-faced spinning reel. Low-stretch braided
lines are generally used in bait-casting and open-faced spin-
fishing. Fly lines for fly-fishing are coated with a plastic finish
to add weight. They come level or tapered to facilitate casting.
Avoid the level fly line, as it is frustrating to cast.
No matter what type of line you choose for your rig,
keep it in good shape by following these tips.
• Store fishing line at room temperature. Too much heat,
sunlight, or cold can weaken the line.
• If a knot forms in monofilament or braided line near your
rig, cut the line above the knot and at the rig, then re-tie the
line. Recycle the cut end if possible, or dispose of it properly.
• Frequently check the last 10 to 12 feet of casting line for
nicks and abrasions by running the line between your
fingers. If the line feels too rough, cut the rough piece,
retie your rig, and resume line fishing with fresh line.
• Dispose of used and broken fishing line responsibly. Do not
discard monofilament or braided line on the ground; pack it
out for the safety of wildlife. Many tackle shops offer
recycling bins specifically for used fishing line.


FISHING 53
.Balanced Tackle
Knots for Fishing
Contrary to the thinking of many novice anglers, a simple
overhand knot will not do in most fishing situations. Although
a knot may seem insignificant and hardly noticeable to the
observer, it can be, and quite often is, the crucial factor
between success and failure. Most knots reduce line strength.
By moistening all monofilament knots before bringing them
tight, you will get a stronger knot.
Note: The first five knots are the required knots, while the
others are still worth knowing.
Arbor Knot. The arbor knot attaches the fishing line to the reel
arbor or spool hub. The line must be secured to the reel so that
it does not slip off. This knot is tied by first passing the fishing
line around the reel spool or arbor, then tying an overhand knot
(half hitch) around the main line. Then tie a second overhand
knot on the end of the lead end. Next, tighten the overhand,
closing tighter as it slides down on the spool. Pull the main line
tight, and the second overhand will serve as a stopper knot by
sliding it tight snug to the first overhand. Trim the excess.
TO HOOK OR LURE
END OF LINE
TAG END
LOOP
AROUND
SPOOL
Improved Clinch Knot. This is the universal knot for tying mono-
filament to a hook or for tying hooks and swivels—any object
having an eye—to the line. Because monofilament is
slippery, it needs a knot that will jam against itself and
hold tight, yet not cut itself. Thread the line through the
hook eye and pull out about five or more inches of
monofilament. Wrap the tag end around the standing
line five turns and put that line back through the space
between the hook eye and the first line wrap. Then
bring the line back through the big loop just formed
and pull it through enough so it will stay put. Wet the
knot, hold on to the hook, and pull on the longer line
as you keep the short line end taut. Push the knot
toward the hook eye and snug it tight. Trim any excess.


54 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Palomar Knot. This basic knot serves the same purpose as the
improved clinch knot. Double the line to make a 3- to 4-inch loop,
then pass the end of the loop through the hook eye. Hold the
standing part between thumb and forefinger and tie a loose over-
hand knot in the double line with the other hand. Then pass the
hook through the loop and pull on the doubled line to tighten the
knot, guiding the loop over the top of the eyelet. Clip the tag end.
2 3 4 51
Uni Knot. This knot is easy to
tie and very popular for placing
a hook or lure on the monofila-
ment line. First, run the mono-
filament line through the eye of
the hook and bring it parallel
with the standing line. Now
make a loop by bringing it back
toward the hook eye, and wrap
the tag end upward inside the
loop. Then wrap it around both the lines five or six times. Pull
the knot tightly, then moisten it and slide it down to the eye of
the hook or swivel. Make sure it is tight, and trim any excess
from the tag end.
Uni to Uni Knot. This knot is
used to attach or reattach two
sections of line. Start by over-
lapping the tag end of your line
to be attached to the standing
line eight to 10 inches. Now
take your standing line end, tie
a uni knot around the tag line
four or five times, and pull the knot tight. Start the second knot
with the tag end forming the uni around the standing line with
four or five wraps. Pull the second uni snug, and draw the two
knots together tightly. Tighten the tags firmly and trim the
excess tags, making a smooth transition.


FISHING 55
.Balanced Tackle
Other Knots Worth Knowing
Blood Knot. This knot is usually used to join two sections of
line or leader, even if they are of slightly different diameters.
Lap the ends of the lines or leaders several inches. Then twist
one around the other, making at least five turns. Place the end
between the strands and hold them together between thumb
and forefinger. Wind the same number of turns (five) in the
opposite direction, using the end of the other line. Pass that end
through the same space of the first line, but in the opposite
A chain is only as strong as its weakest link, and a fishing line is only as
strong as its knots. It would be sad to lose a nice fish because of a poorly
tied knot. Always use the proper knot for each occasion, and practice
these knots often. Test your knot after tying. You do not want it to fail
when hooking the fish of a lifetime.
direction. Then pull on the two ends to
draw the turns closer together. When
they have closed up snugly, pull tight on
the ends to make the knot as small as
possible. Clip the ends.
Double Surgeon’s Loop. A double sur-
geon’s loop is an easy way to form a
loop in the end of a line or leader.
Double the end of the line and make a
single overhand knot. Then pass the loop
around and through the overhand knot
again. Hold the loop in one hand and the standing part and tag
end in the other hand. Moisten the knot with water and pull to
tighten. Clip off the tag end.
Loop Knot. This is used to tie on lures that require freedom
of movement. Tie a loose overhand loop and pass it through
the eye of the lure. Pass the running line through the open
overhand loop and create an overhand loop around the
standing line. The front knot is pulled tight, then the back
knot, which leaves a loose loop in front of
the lure, allowing the lure to swing back
and forth, with a minimum of resistance.
PULL
PULL
AND TRIM
1 2 3 4


56 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Loop-to-Loop Knot. This knot
combines two leaders, each with
a double surgeon’s loop. The
leaders can be changed easily
with this connection.
Surgeon’s Knot. This is a line-to-
line joining knot. Start by laying
the two lines to be joined with tag
ends in opposite directions, overlapping by six-plus inches. Now
take the overlapping lines and
form a double overhand knot,
passing the tag end and the
entire shorter line through the
loop twice. Finish by moisten-
ing the knot and pulling both
ends tight.
Required Knots for the Fishing Merit Badge
Line to Reel Joining Knots Terminal Tackle Knots
Line to hook or lure
Arbor Knot Uni to Uni Knot Uni Knot Improved
Clinch Knot Palomar Knot
Other Fishing Knots Worth Knowing
Loop Knots Line to Line
Joining Knots
Terminal Knots
Line to hook
Double
Surgeon’s Loop Blood Knot Surgeon’s Knot Loop-to-Loop Loop Knot


FISHING 57
.Balanced Tackle
Hooks must be
kept sharp to be
effective. And
care must be
taken that they get
stuck only in fish,
not in people.
Hooks
Fishhooks are made of steel wire, bent by a machine
to a desired shape, hardened by heat, and given a
rust-resistant finish.
Hooks come in a wide range of sizes. Different hooks are
designed for bait-fishing, lures, and flies. The hook you choose
should be suitable for the fish you wish to catch. It can be
confusing trying to figure out hook sizes, but one simple way
is to start with size 1. The larger the number, the smaller the
hook. Thus, a size 2 is smaller than 1, and a size 4 is smaller
than a size 2. Size 28 hooks are so small they are hard to see!
Going the other way, the addition of /0 means the bigger
the number, the bigger the hook. A 1/0 is bigger than 1, a 2/0
is bigger than 1/0, and so on. A 12/0 hook is very large and is
used to catch big fish such as tuna and shark.
Hooks also come in a variety of shapes. Straight-eye hooks
are used most often with snaps and leaders. Turned-down-eye
hooks are used for bait fishing and flies. Some hooks have sliced
shanks to better grip live bait. Circle hooks are becoming increas-
ingly popular because they often are self-setting, catching the fish
on the outer jaw where they are less likely to be injured.
Barbless hooks play a role in safety both for the fish and for
anglers (who might accidentally get hooked). These special
hooks are made without barbs. As more and more anglers release
their catch, barbless hooks make hook removal faster and safer.
Some fisheries even require barbless
hooks. Many anglers believe a barbless
hook will lose fish, where a standard
barbed hook helps ensure a catch. With
good line control that is not a problem.
Jig hooks are made so that the
wire will not twist inside the leadhead.
SHANK
EYE
12/0
TUNA
BEND
BITE
BARB
POINT
2/0 1 6 2/0
EVENT SAFETY
BAIT HOOK
2 TURNED-
DOWN-EYE
162/0 JIG
HOOK
CIRCLEBARBLESS


58 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Sinkers
Many types of sinkers, each designed for specific types
of fishing, are useful in getting the bait down to the fish.
Some of the more common sinkers include the following:
• Trolling sinkers, which move through the water effectively
• Split-shot sinkers, which come in a variety of sizes and
are designed to be pinched on the line or leader
• Worm sinkers, which are effective in weed beds where
plastic worms might snag or tear
• Dipsey and pyramid sinkers, which usually are used when
a lot of weight is needed on the line
• Barrel sinkers—named for their shape—have a hole so
the line can run free
Other types of sinkers include:
• Clinch-on sinker, which has two wings that can be bent
over the line or leader and squeezed tight
• Saltwater sinker, popular with anglers who need a weight
that will grip the bottom in tide and surf
• Heavy bank sinker, used for deep-sea fishing
• Sliding sinker, which has a hole in it so that the line can
slide through when a fish strikes, and which can slide over
the bottom without snagging
• Keel sinker, which is used for trolling, because the keel
keeps the weight from twisting the line
PYRAMID
SINKER
BARREL
SINKER
SPLIT-SHOT
SINKER WORM
SINKER
DIPSEY
SINKER
TROLLING SINKER
Sinkers


FISHING 59
.Balanced Tackle
Swivels
Many lures and baits have a tendency to twist the line, causing
it to kink and snarl. Swivels are designed to allow the baits to
revolve, helping to eliminate the twisting. Many swivels are
built with snaps, which allow a hook, lure, or leader to be
clipped on without using a knot.
Using a three-way swivel allows a no-twist connection to
the line, a no-twist connection with a leader to the hook or
lure, and another no-twist connection to a separate leader and
a sinker. Some species of saltwater fish are extremely powerful,
requiring special steel swivel-snap combinations.
Despite the best intentions, anglers sometimes lose
sinkers. Sinkers are often made of lead, and lead is toxic
to wildlife. Scientists have discovered that lead sinkers
have been responsible for the deaths of a number of
loons and other water birds that accidentally ingested
them. Wildlife experts are urging anglers to consider
sinkers made of environmentally friendly materials such
as rock, ceramics, iron, steel, and bismuth. Some states
have instituted a lead-sinker exchange program in which
anglers may exchange their lead sinkers for lead-free
alternatives such as tungsten or tin.
SNAP
AND
BARREL
THREE-WAY
Swivels
BARREL


60 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Bobbers/Strike Indicators
Strike indicators not only hold the bait at a
fixed depth, they let the angler know when
a fish bites. As the fish takes the bait, it
causes the strike indicator to dip or sway.
Simple bobbers have been around for years
and are a type of float. They are inexpensive
and popular for the young or casual angler. The problem is they
are not nearly as sensitive as a pencil type of float. If you wish
to more easily detect a bite, pencil floats will deliver a higher
catch rate. All floats are attached to the fishing line and are
adjustable to allow the bait to be adjusted to a favorable depth.
Bobber. The simplest kind of bobber has a wire loop on the
top and bottom that operates on a spring so that the line or
leader can be clipped on and anchored in place. The bobber is
effective to hold the line depth and will detect a strong bite as
it dips in response to that strike. You can miss a light nibble,
though, as fish strip a worm from your hook without detection.
Bobbers are made of plastic and are inexpensive.
Weighted Bobber. Weighted plastic bobbers make it easier to
cast a light bait or a fly far on regular spinning tackle.
Pencil Float. These are long, thin, and light and are effective
for fish that bite lightly. With a pencil bobber float, a fish will
feel no drag or resistance when it pulls on the bait. The line is
held against the bobber by an adjustable rubber sleeve band.
Slip Bobber Float. The slip bobber float has a hollow stem
through which the line passes. A sliding knot is tied above the
bobber float on the line, and the knot will not go through the
tiny hole in the stem. Any depth can be set. When the bait is
reeled in, the bobber float will slide down to the hook or
sinker, which makes it easy to cast.
Years ago, many
anglers made
their own bobbers
and floats from
corks, balsa
wood, or
porcupine quills.
Pencil
bobber
float
Slip
bobber
float
Simple bobbers
Weighted
bobber
float


FISHING 61
.Balanced Tackle
Live Freshwater Bait
Natural foods are easy to fish, require a minimum of tackle, and
are highly effective. Anglers may seek out their own bait
or purchase it in specialized bait shops.
Be aware that releasing live bait and bait water can
introduce undesirable fish, parasites, or diseases to native fish.
To ensure that you do not accidentally make an unwanted
biological introduction, try to obtain live baits that are native
to the waters you intend to fish. At the end of the fishing day,
do not release live bait (regardless of origin) into the water.
Dispose of unused live bait and any water in the bait bucket
on land well away from any water.
Worms. Red worms, garden worms, and night
crawlers all are good baits. A small hook (size 8
to 12) embedded in the head of a worm works
well for many species. For bluegill, use small
worms or pieces of a worm to hide the hook.
Minnows. Anglers use dozens of minnow varieties as bait.
One common method is to hook the minnow through both
lips, from the bottom up. Another is to put the
hook through the body near the tail or just behind
the dorsal fin.
Crickets. Crickets are a great bait when fishing
for bluegill and sunfish. If the fishing are not biting
on worms, try a live cricket. Hook the cricket by putting the
hook under the collar (or thorax) right behind the head.
Crayfish. As crayfish grow, they shed their hard outer coat
several times in the summer. When in the “soft” state
they make an excellent gamefish bait.
Leeches. The ribbon leech is an excellent and hardy
bait. Most fish will reject bloodsucking leeches.
Hellgrammites. These larvae of the dobsonfly are found under
rocks in riffles. They are excellent bait but must be kept off the
bottom or they will snag the hook.
Before you make your live-bait choice, be sure to check the local fishing
regulations regarding the use of live bait. Some classes of live bait may be
permitted in your area only during certain times of the year or not at all.
Worm
Minnows
Crayfish


62 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Live Saltwater Bait
All popular species of saltwater fish can be taken on live bait.
Anglers who live near the coast often catch their own. Others
purchase theirs in bait shops. It takes considerable knowledge
of each fish species to know which bait to use and how.
Eels. These are a common bait along the
East Coast, particularly for striped bass
and bluefish. Anglers often place eels on
a double-hook rig, usually with a
weighted hook in the head.
Crabs. Several species are used as bait,
the fiddler crab being the most common.
The larger claw is pulled off and the
hook embedded in the crab at that point.
Sandworms. Along with bloodworms,
sandworms are a popular bait. For large
fish, the whole worm is hooked on. For
smaller fish, the worm may be cut up
and just a piece used.
Shrimp. Used whole or with just the
tails on the hook, shrimp are excellent
for a wide variety of fish. A piece of
shrimp on a jig is highly effective.
Squid. Cut into strips, squid will take
many species of saltwater fish. Other cut
bait such as mullet or menhaden are
used for weakfish, bluefish,
channel bass, and striped bass.
Baitfish. There are many varieties of bait-
fish, which can be caught live in a net
when fishing or at a bait shop. Baitfish
are fished live, hooked through the nose.
Before going fishing, research the type of
baitfish eaten by fish in your area, or by
the species of fish you will be fishing for.
Clams. These come in many sizes. Small
clam meats are used whole; large ones
may be cut up. Clam meats are obtained
by pushing a knife between the shells
and severing the muscles.


FISHING 63
.Balanced Tackle
Artificial Lures
While some anglers prefer the natural attraction provided by
live bait, others favor artificial lures that can be bought in
sporting goods stores or made meticulously by hand.
Jigs. Hooks with lead weights molded into the head—called
leadheads or jigs—are the basis for a whole range of popular
artificial lures. The advantage is in having a single-hook lure
that is compact but that can carry enough weight to be easily
cast by a bait rod or spin rod. Jigs also are adaptable to a variety
of styles that allow them to imitate food that fish recognize.
There are several styles of plastic-bodied grubs impaled on
a jig hook. A bucktail hair tied to create a weighted streamer
fly, a weedless bucktail designed for fishing in brush, and a
twister-type plastic body that has a wiggling tail in the water.
Also included is a Canadian minnow-type jig made with a soft
chenille body, feather hackle front and back, and a feather tail.
Tips for Using a Jig
• Jigs are meant for slow, patient fishing. Retrieve them very
slowly in cold weather or when ice fishing.
• Retrieve jigs with action—jerks or pulls imparting
a swimming motion.
• When a fish strikes a jig, it may be detected as only a
twitch in the line. Be aware, and set the hook immediately.
• Fish with the lightest jig that allows you to feel when
the jig is on the bottom.
• Be sure to keep jig hooks sharp so they are not
easily dislodged.


64 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Plastic Baits. These soft, pliable lures in varying styles and
shapes can be made to swim, wiggle, and dance underwater
with an action the fish cannot resist. They are used plain on a
bare hook, impaled on a jig, or effectively utilized with several
popular rigs. Bass are particularly attracted to these artificial
worms, which the industry provides in different styles, shapes,
and colors. In addition, scented soft baits are available in
numerous styles.
Spoons. When anglers noticed that minnows and certain other
aquatic creatures glistened in the sunlight, the idea of making
lures out of shiny metal was born. Spoons are made by cutting
pieces of metal to shape, hammering them out so that they
wobble in the water, and polishing them to a high shine.
Various colors of enamel are added to some; others are given
gold or silver finishes. They are called spoons because most of
them are shaped like the lower part of a teaspoon.
Spinners. A spinner is made by hammering a piece
of metal very thin, drilling a hole in one end, and mounting
it on a strip of wire. The metal blade spins around the
wire shaft, glinting like a live minnow swimming in
the sunlight. Spinners may be rigged with hair
flies, feather streamers, or live bait.
Sometimes they are used alone with the
blade and hook. Most spinners work
best if retrieved slowly, just fast enough
for the blade to revolve without being a
blur. Spinners are sometimes rigged
with jigs for deep fishing. These might
have snaps that can be clipped to the
eye of the jig.
When trolling,
anglers use a
cowbell rig, a
multi-bladed
variation of the
single spinner.
Plastic worms
are fished slowly,
on or near the
bottom. With
the Texas rig or
weedless rig, the
fish is allowed to
mouth the bait
before the
hook is set.


FISHING 65
.Balanced Tackle
Most plugs have
several treble
hooks, and
anglers must take
care not to stick
themselves or
their fishing
companions on
the barbs. It is
recommended for
safety that treble
hooks be replaced
by inline single
hooks.
Plugs or Crankbaits Plugs. The first plugs—minnowlike repli-
cas—were carved out of wood. Some still are, but most are
made of plastic by lure manufacturers. Floating-diving plugs
rest on the surface until reeled in. They are designed to wiggle
in the water like a minnow or crayfish.
Some crankbaits are made
to run deep. These may be
either all metal or weighted
with metal and plastic. Some
have a long bill in the front that
causes them to head for
the bottom when retrieved.
They also are effective lures
when trolled behind a boat.
Some surface baits are
made to imitate a frog
hopping, a mouse
swimming—or,
perhaps like a popper,
an injured minnow
or insect that is flopping
around in distress. Bass, pike,
and muskellunge are species most
often caught on these gurgling, popping,
and sputtering lures.
Floating-diving plug
Deep-running plug
Surface plug
Flashing Minnows
Fish often pursue schools of minnows up to the
surface, causing the minnows to skip from the water
in a desperate attempt to escape. These surface
eruptions, called boils, show that there are gamefish
below on the feed. Casting minnow-like lures
into these spots is often a surefire way of catching
the gamefish that are chasing the schools of minnows.


66 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Flies. Flies are tied to represent insects, primarily but also crabs,
shrimp, and tiny minnows—the preferred food of trout, salmon,
and many other gamefish such as bass, panfish, carp, and pike.
The fish are deceived into taking the imitation of their food. Some
flies can also simulate hatching insects. Flies are made of hair,
feathers, wool, chenille, and many other natural and artificial
materials, all held together on the hook with thread and glue.
Dry flies are tied on light wire hooks and
are constructed so that they will float like a
newly hatched land-based insect that has fallen
into the water. Casting a dry fly so that it lands
lightly and floats naturally requires skill.
Wet flies are tied so that they sink and are
fished beneath the surface. They are meant to
imitate aquatic insects as they emerge to hatch as
well as many organisms that swim. Trout and
other species feed on these in great numbers.
Nymphs simulate aquatic insect larvae
that live in the silt and gravel in stream and
lake bottoms. Nymph flies are tied to represent
these different types of larvae. Nymphs rise to
the surface to hatch as mature insects.
Longer hooks, wisps of hair, and soft
feathers make the long, slim streamer flies
appear like shiners, chubs, darters, and other
minnows. Sometimes they can be sunk with a
split shot to get into the deep holes where big
trout lie. Most streamers, especially in salt
water, are fished rapidly in swift jerks to imitate
frightened minnows racing for freedom.
Both largemouth bass and smallmouth bass
are ever on the alert for big bugs, frogs, mice,
or anything else edible that might fall into the
water. Bass bugs or poppers are tied with cork
or hair bodies so that they will float easily. Some
have concave heads that make a noisy pop when
jerked on the surface with a fly rod.
Sick or injured minnows often struggle on
the surface. Bass spot these cork minnows
as an easy meal and are quick to gulp
them down.


FISHING 67
Tied with hollow deer hair, the hair mouse
lure looks like a little mouse that stumbled
and fell into the water—all a bass or a big brown
trout needs for a quick lunch.
Usually tied with hairy legs and painted with
green spots, these high-floating cork-bodied frogs
appear to the fish just like the real thing.
Cork bugs can be made more lifelike by
adding strands of rubber legs that stick out
of the sides and wiggle to mimic swimming.
Small cork-bodied lures, called panfish bugs,
are sometimes the best baits for bluegills, rock
bass, and crappies, particularly in the spring
when these fish are in the shallows.
Rigs
When bait is used with any combination of bobbers, line,
sinkers, and hooks, an angler’s rig is created. The rig usually is
connected to or fashioned from the end of the fishing line.
Freshwater Live Bait Rigs
There are many combinations of freshwater rigs, and each one
has a special function.
Slip Sinker. Designed to get the bait down to the bottom while
also allowing the fish to run free without any drag on the line,
the slip sinker has a hole through which the line can run freely.
A swivel and snap below the sinker keep the sinker from
sliding down to the hook.
Jig-and-Bait. This is an old standby with most freshwater
anglers. The leadheaded jig gets the bait down to the fish
where it can be drifted or retrieved in short jerks. Minnows,
worms, leeches—all live
bait—work well with this
method. When a fish strikes,
it must be allowed to run
with the bait before the
hook is set.
SLIP SINKER
JIG-AND-BAIT


68 FISHING
Balanced Tackle.
Slip Float Rig. With the slip float rig, the hollow stem on the
slip float allows the line to slide through to a preset depth.
However, when the bait is reeled in, the float slides down to the
sinker. Thus, the angler can cast the bait some distance away,
yet the bait and sinker will drop to the proper depth. A wisp of
heavier Dacron tied to the line makes a knot that stops at the
float tip.
Floating Jig Head. Instead of a leadhead, the floating jig head
is made of foam or hollow plastic. This rig, with live bait, is
used with a slip sinker and is designed to get down to the bot-
tom but will keep the bait and hook 18 to 24 inches off the
rocks. It is an effective and relatively snap-free method of
fishing all varieties of live bait.
Saltwater Bait Rigs
Surf anglers generally use two basic rigs when fishing with
natural baits. The first, the standard surf rig, uses a three-way
swivel tied a few inches above a pyramid sinker. The hook and
leader are tied to one eye on the three-way swivel, and the line
is attached to the remaining eye.
The other rig is known as the fish-finder rig. The fish-finder
has a ring on one end and a snap on the other. A large-sized
snap swivel may be used as a substitute. A barrel swivel is
inserted between the leader and the line to act as a stop.
Both rigs can be used with different leaders and various
sizes and types of hooks, depending on the fish you are after.
Leaders made from monofilament, fluorocarbon, wire, or
stainless-steel wire measuring about 18 inches long are
recommended. Either rig can be used for striped bass, redfish,
bluefish, weakfish, sharks and other surf-feeding fish.
FISH-FINDER RIG
SLIP JOGGER
FLOATING
JIG HEAD
SURF RIG
You can attach a cork to a surf rig or a fish-finder rig
leader to float the bait off the bottom and help keep it
away from crabs and bottom snags.


FISHING 69
.Balanced Tackle
Pacific Salmon Rig. This is an ideal rig for slow trolling or
drifting when fishing for king and coho salmon. A plug-cut or
a whole herring is attached to a two-hook rig on a 3-foot leader.
The leader is attached to the eye of a crescent sinker weighing
from 2 to 6 ounces, depending on the current and the depth
you want to fish. Let the rig go down to the bottom, and then
reel back slowly. When you get your first strike, mark your line
so that you can let the rig down to the same depth again.
Summer Flounder Rig. To rig for fluke,
attach 2 or 3 feet of leader to one eye of
a three-way swivel. Attach a sinker to
another eye with only an inch or two
of leader line. Then, attach a long-
shanked hook to the end of the leader.
Use a strip of squid or clam for bait.
To further enhance the rig and draw
the attention of more fish, add a spin-
ner blade or two to the leader.
Winter Flounder Rig. This two-hooked rig uses a wire
spreader to keep the two hooks apart so that they can lie
together on the bottom where the flounder will be feeding.
The sinker is attached to a snap in the middle. The single-
hooked rig has its hook tied a few inches above the sinker.
Both rigs use a long-shanked hook tipped with a small piece
of clam or sea worm.
CRESCENT SINKER
Pacific salmon rig
3 FEET
RIG FOR FLUKE
TWO-HOOKED RIG
ENHANCED RIG
SINGLE-HOOKED RIG
Winter flounder rigs


70 FISHING
Fishing Gear and Craft.
Inexpensive tackle
carriers can be
adapted from
plastic boxes
that are sold in
hardware stores
to hold bolts,
nuts, and other
small items.
Fishing Gear and Craft
Before you head out to fish a lake or stream, you’ll need to pack
a tackle box, a landing net, and other necessary gear. To ensure
an enjoyable day of fishing, be sure you dress for the
weather conditions.
Tackle Boxes
Carrying cases for lines, leaders, hooks, lures, reels, and other
pieces of equipment come in a wide range of sizes. New, rugged,
noncorrosive plastic tackle boxes have largely replaced the old
metal boxes used years ago. All tackle boxes are designed to
keep the items separated so that they do not become tangled.
Some anglers keep all their tackle in a large box, using smaller
boxes to carry whatever they will need for one day. Some have
separate boxes for spinning, spin-casting, bait-casting, saltwater,
and/or fly-fishing equipment. A well-ordered tackle box makes
fishing easier and is the mark of an experienced angler.
Over the years many items worth a lot of money may
accumulate in a tackle box, some of them difficult to replace.
Smart anglers are careful not to drop their tackle box into the
lake or stream nor to leave it on the shore unattended and
vulnerable to theft. Rinse lures and tackle in clean freshwater
and allow them to thoroughly dry before putting them away.
This will help ensure long-lasting and dependable tackle.
Many fly fishers prefer
plastic or aluminum
boxes to hold individual
flies. Usually all the flies
needed for one trip can
easily be carried in a
small box that fits in
a jacket pocket.


FISHING 71
.Fishing Gear and Craft
Landing Nets
Landing nets come in a variety of sizes, from small, light, trout
nets that hang from a cord around the body to huge boat nets.
Newer nets ads made of soft rubber or silicone for the safety of
the fish. The older style netting made of heavy, knotted thread
tends to remove the fish’s protective slime coating.
The type of fishing an angler will be doing determines the
type of net to be used. You can land some fish by hand, but
using a landing net helps ensure that the fish will not slip and
get loose. If the fish is to be released unharmed, it is better to
reach down with the fingers or with pliers and slip the
(hopefully barbless) hook loose while the
fish is in the water.
Stringers
In cool weather when the water is
cold, some species of fish may
be kept alive on a stringer until
the day is over. Stringers with
individual snaps are best,
keeping the fish separated
and allowing them more
breathing room.
Tackle Box Items
Among the usual lures, line, and other
necessities, consider storing a few of
the following items with your tackle.
■■ A pair of gloves
■■ Sunglasses
■■ A disposable or waterproof camera
■■ A small first-aid kit
■■ Hand towels or wet wipes
■■ Insect repellent
■■ Sunscreen
■■ A compass
■■ A boot repair kit
■■ Duct tape


72 FISHING
Fishing Gear and Craft.
Accessories
Fillet Knife. A good, sharp knife with a long,
thin, flexible blade is best for cleaning fish. It
should be kept secure in a sheath when not
being used.
Sharpener. A sharpening system capable
of honing a razor’s edge should be available
at home. For fishing trips, a small steel or
diamond-edge sharpener will touch up the
blade when work needs to be done. Such a
sharpener also can be used to touch up hook
points that get dull.
Line Clipper. Anglers always should use some
type of cutter or knife to cut monofilament
line, never the teeth. A fingernail clipper on
an elastic cord is a handy item.
Long-Nosed Pliers. Use these pliers for
taking hooks out of fish and for straightening
bent hooks. Pliers should be equipped with
a wire cutter.
Reel Oil. A can of oil and a small tube of gear
grease will keep reels running smoothly and
make them last years longer.


FISHING 73
.Fishing Gear and Craft
Clothing
Since fishing is an outdoor pastime, wear clothing suitable for
the season that will protect you from the elements.
Rain Gear. Anglers discover quickly that rain often accompa-
nies some of the best fishing. The best outfits are matching
rain parkas and pants in earth tones, made of waterproof and
windproof fabric. Lightweight rain gear can be rolled into a
small package and stowed in the pocket of a jacket or pack.
Ponchos will do a good job of shedding rain, but they provide
poor coverage on windy days and make casting difficult.


74 FISHING
Fishing Gear and Craft.
Fishing Vest. This handy many-pocket garment is useful
for carrying hooks, leaders, flies, lures, bait, and other
items. The fishing vest helps keep an angler’s hands
free. While it is not a necessity, it is convenient for
the angler who can afford one. When shopping for a
fishing vest, think about the weather conditions you
will encounter. Be aware of the bulk your filled
pockets may create. You might want to consider a
vest that comes with a personal flotation device
built in—it will inflate if you pull a cord.
Footgear. Sneakers or leather boots with good traction are
suitable footwear for fishing from a boat, but the wading angler
needs to pay careful attention to the feet. In cold weather, or
in icy trout streams or surf, hip boots—or better yet, chest-high
waders—help keep the legs dry. In warm streams during
summer, it may be tempting to wade barefoot, but wading
with bare feet invites injuries from broken glass, rusty nails,
lost hooks, or even a spiny sea urchin. To avoid foot and leg
injuries, wear a pair of old shoes and old jeans.
Some states prohibit felt-bottom wading boots because they
might harbor and transfer unwanted organisms between water
bodies. Be aware of invasive species in your area, and strive to
follow all regulations.


FISHING 75
.Fishing Gear and Craft
Canoes and
kayaks are handy
for getting into
those hard-to-
reach rivers and
lakes that seldom
see many anglers.
Fishing Craft
Almost any kind of watercraft can be used for fishing. Some
boats lend themselves more readily to angling than others,
and some boats are designed specifically for fishing.
Bass Boats
These craft are unique to a special kind of angling. The seats
are high to make casting easier. They have a large motor to get
from one spot to another, and a smaller electric motor that may
be used to guide the boat stealthily along the shoreline.
Canoes and Kayaks
These are at the other end of the watercraft spectrum—light,
portable, low in price, and nonmotorized. They are excellent
fishing craft, because they make it possible to stalk silently
and to maneuver quickly when a trophy fish is hooked.
Remember, however, that it may be unsafe to stand and cast in
canoes and kayaks unless they are specifically designed to allow
you to do so.
During any Scouting activity afloat, your group must
abide by Scouting America’s Safety Afloat procedures.
Remember to always wear a personal flotation device
whenever you are afloat. Your Scout leader can review
the Safety Afloat guidelines with you.


76 FISHING
Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish.
Cleaning, Filleting,
and Cooking Fish
There are as many recipes for cooking a freshly caught fish as
there are anglers. Proper cleaning and preparation of a fish
before cooking will help ensure success with whatever cooking
method you choose.
Cleaning Fish
Following these step-by-step instructions for cleaning a fish will
make this messy task more manageable.
Step 1—Cover the area with brown paper or newspaper. Keep
a plastic bag handy for any waste. Make sure you have a sharp
flexible-bladed knife.
Step 2—Rinse the fish under clean, cool water.
Step 3—Remove the scales using a scale remover or knife.
(Hold the fish firmly by the head and run the dull edge of your
knife from tail to head until the fish feels slick.) Catfish can be
skinned and thus won’t need to be scaled. To skin the fish, cut
down the backside and loosen the skin around the fins. Remove
the skin with pliers; pull the skin down from head to tail and
cut it off at the tail. Trout do not need to be scaled or skinned.
Step 4—Starting at the anal opening near the tail, cut through
the belly to the gills.
Step 5—Open the belly and remove the entrails and gills from
the fish. (Don’t burst the stomach.) Scrape out the kidney line
(it is reddish-brown) along the underside of the backbone.
Step 6—If you want, remove the head by carefully cutting
down through the backbone.
Step 7—Remove the tail and pull off the dorsal fin (along the
top of the fish) with a quick tug.
Step 8—Rinse the fish well under cool running water.
Responsibly
dispose of all
fish entrails,
skeletons, and
other remains.
If you are on a
camping or
hiking trip, follow
Leave No Trace
principles, and
treat this waste
as you would
human waste.


FISHING 77
.Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish
Filleting Fish
Keep in mind that not all fish should be filleted. A trout, for
instance, needs only to be cleaned. Removing the meat of some
fish from the bones and skin makes it easier to cook and to eat.
Here is one way to do it.
Step 1—Lay the fish on its side and make a cut just
behind the gills down to the backbone, but not through it.
Step 2—Start at the cut made in step 1 and run the point
of the knife alongside the backbone, down to where it
starts to click along the tops of the ribs. Cut alongside the
ribs, working back toward the tail until the entire side of
the fish is free from the ribs and backbone, but leave it
attached to the tail.
Step 3—Lay the side flat and hook a forefinger under the
skin near the tail. Run the knife into the meat next to the
skin and hold the blade against the inside of the skin at an
angle of about 45 degrees. Holding the blade steady, gently
lift the forefinger holding the skin and pull. The skin will
slide out, leaving a boneless, skinless fillet. Repeat on the
other side of the fish, and you will have two fillets.
1
2
3


78 FISHING
Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish.
Cooking Fish
There are dozens of ways to cook fish. The following recipes
can be prepared at home or on the trail.
Baked Fish
Bake your fish at home or in a Dutch oven at camp for a tasty
and healthy meal. Heat oven to 450°F. Spray a foil sheet or
shallow baking dish with nonstick cooking spray. Prepare the
fish, either whole or fillets, with seasoning and arrange in a sin-
gle layer. Bake the fish in the oven until it is done. Generally,
10 minutes per inch of thickness is all the time needed.
The fillets should flake apart easily for proper readiness.
Foil-Baked Fish
Place a whole fish or large fillet inside a sheet of
heavy aluminum foil. Salt and pepper the fish. Lay
two strips of bacon over the top of the fish. Add a
slice of lemon, if you wish. Fold the foil lengthwise
into a pouch, then fold over the edges, sealing them.
Take another sheet of foil and do the same, giving
the fish a double layer. Bake in oven or on hot coals
for 20 to 30 minutes, depending on the size of the fish.
Pan Fried Fish
Allow the fillets to drain on a paper towel or similar absorbent
material until they are fairly dry. Salt the
fillets, then mix a pancake batter or batter made of one egg and
1 cup of self-rising flour. Add a bit of milk to thin the batter. Do
not make the batter too thin. You also can bread the fish by
Get rid of that
fishy smell on your
hands by rubbing
them with half a
lemon and then
washing with
soap and water.


FISHING 79
.Cleaning, Filleting, and Cooking Fish
dipping the fillets in beaten eggs thinned with milk and then
rolling them in seasoned cracker crumbs or cornmeal.
Make sure the oil in the frying pan is sizzling hot. Then
dip each fillet in the batter and drop it into the oil, being care-
ful not to splatter the oil. When one side of the fillet is brown,
flip it and brown the other side. Generally, five minutes per
inch of thickness is all the time needed. Remove from the oil
and allow the fish to cool a little on a paper towel. Serve hot.
Poached Fish
Almost any fish may be gently cooked in heated liquid such as
water, fruit juice, or milk. Poached fish is easy to cook and easy
on the digestion. Salt some fresh fish fillets and set them aside.
Then melt a little butter in a frying pan. Add a half-inch of milk
to the bottom of the pan. Heat the milk until it steams, but do
not boil it. Add the salted fish fillets, cover the pan, and let the
fish simmer for 10 minutes. Remove and drain the fish. A dash
of paprika is a nice finishing touch.
Adding Flavor to Your Fish
When cooking fish, explore different seasonings to find flavors
you enjoy. Some enjoy the flavor of fresh lemon or lime and
butter with their fish. This works well in a frying pan or when
cooking a fish fillet in aluminum foil. Others enjoy a spicier
Cajun or blackened seasoning. There are many different fish
rubs and seasonings; try other spice combinations. Or top your
fish with a mashed fresh fruit blend like fresh berries, diced
mango, or a pineapple salsa.
The trick to turning out tasty fried fish is to have enough hot
cooking oil and some type of batter or breading to seal the meat
so that the fish cooks quickly without absorbing the oil.





FISHING 81
.Protecting Gamefish Resources
Protecting Gamefish
Resources
The United States has a well-run and healthy recreational
fishery. Combined with state fishing license revenue and Sport
Fish Restoration taxes paid on fishing tackle and motor boat
fuels, more than $1 billion is invested each year to support a
recreational fishing industry that has a combined annual value
of more than $100 billion.
Obeying Fish and Game Laws
According to the 2016 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
National Survey, more than 35 million anglers
fish each year. With all of these anglers on
our nation’s waterways, it is necessary for
the taking of fish to be regulated so that
fish populations do not decline. State
conservation departments seek laws
that will balance fish production with
the harvest. Trained conservation
officers patrol the waterways to see
that the laws are followed.
Limits. Each state puts a limit on the
number of gamefish of each species
that may be taken by an angler at one
time. Limits vary in direct proportion to
the availability of the fish. More scarce spe-
cies have a much lower limit. Muskellunge, for
instance, in many states are limited to one a day.
Panfish, which are prolific and numerous, have much higher
limits or no limits at all. Some areas may have regulations for
the catch and release of some species. An ethical angler will
adhere to both the letter and the spirit of the law.


82 FISHING
Protecting Gamefish Resources.
Methods. As fishing has evolved from being mainly a method
for gathering food into a sport, rules of sportsmanship have
been incorporated into the regulations. Gamefish must be taken
on hook and line and cannot be speared or netted except with
a landing net. In some areas, trout may be taken only on artifi-
cial flies. Where salmon and steelhead trout migrate up streams
to spawn, only single hooks may be used on lures to prevent
unscrupulous anglers from trying to snag fish with
treble hooks. In many areas, only one lure or bait may be used
on one line, and only one line is allowed for each angler.
Seasons. To protect fish while spawning, some seasons
are set so that gamefish can lay their eggs without
interference. For species such as pike and wall-
eye, seasons might open after spawning ends
in the spring. For lake trout, brook trout,
and other fall-spawning species, the sea-
sons may be closed in late autumn, just
before spawning starts. When fish are
spawning, they are particularly vulnera-
ble because they savagely strike to pro-
tect their eggs.
Failure to know and obey the fish
and game laws can lead to an arrest
and a stiff fine. True sports enthusiasts
never poach or consider breaking the
rules. Many states have a TIP (Turn In
Poachers) hotline telephone number that
can be called to report violations. People who
break the fish and game laws are stealing from
their fellow outdoor enthusiasts and demonstrating a
lack of concern for wildlife and the environment.
Information. Most marine docks and shops that sell tackle and
bait and issue fishing licenses also supply information about
local fishing regulations. You might also check with local or
district fish and game offices or their websites and social media
channels. Be aware that in some cases you may need to obtain
a special permit in addition to a basic fishing license.
Most states offer online purchase of fishing licenses
and other required permits.


FISHING 83
.Protecting Gamefish Resources
Fish Resource Management
All states maintain a staff of trained fisheries personnel who
conduct research on the resources and determine how recre-
ational fishing license revenue should be spent to get the best
results. To determine fish populations, survey nets are set and
the fish are tallied as to numbers, age, and growth rates. Where
fish numbers are low, either through heavy fishing or for natu-
ral reasons, stocking takes place with fry, fingerlings, and year-
ling fish from state or federal hatcheries.
However, it was discovered that merely adding fish to
many lakes and streams did not improve the fishing, thus
research has become an important tool. The nation’s fishing
tackle manufacturers and sportspeople, acting together, got
the U.S. Congress to pass a tax on all fishing tackle made and
sold in the country. Named for its sponsors in Congress, the
Dingell-Johnson Sport Fish Restoration tax money generates
hundreds of millions of dollars each year and is apportioned
among the states for scientific studies and other related
fishing-management practices.
Skilled aquatic biologists use chemistry, electronics, and
other aids to determine which species of fish each coastal area,
lake, and stream can best support. As the sport of fishing grows,
our ability to provide adequate populations will depend more
and more on research studies and programs provided by skilled
technicians. Perhaps you might like to be a fishery biologist.


84 FISHING
Protecting Gamefish Resources.
The Future of Sportfishing
All anglers sooner or later discover that it is not enough to
enjoy the sport of fishing and the tasty fish dinners that go with
it. All anglers find that they have a responsibility to their sport
and to the environment in which the fish live. In our modern,
complex society, humans have life-and-death control over the
waters. How we treat those waters and their resources deter-
mines the abundance of gamefish and the future of the sport.
Entire rivers and lakes have been emptied of preferred
gamefish because of human-caused pollution or construction of
small- and large-scale dams. Likewise, there have been many
instances of rivers and lakes reclaimed because anglers and
other outdoor enthusiasts banded together and demanded it.
Scouts have been active in cleaning up trash from rivers and
in assisting state fisheries personnel in the rehabilitation of
streams for gamefish species. Because Scouting is based on out-
door experiences, Scouts have always had a high regard for
maintaining a quality environment.
As long as we as a nation take care of our water resources,
we will always have gamefish for sport and for the table.
In a real sense, when we protect the waterways, we also are
protecting our own future. Our fate and the fate of fish are
inseparable—but only we are able to do something about it.


FISHING 85
.Protecting Gamefish Resources
Outdoor Code
Scouting America’s Outdoor Code helps stimulate
awareness of the need for every user of the outdoors to
be a responsible patron of outdoor resources.
As an American, I will do my best to—
Be Clean in My Outdoor Manners.
I will treat the outdoors as a heritage. I will take care
of it for myself and others. I will keep my trash and
garbage out of lakes, streams, fields, woods,
and roadways.
Be Careful With Fire.
I will prevent wildfire. I will build my fires only when
and where they are permitted and appropriate. When
I have finished using a fire, I will make sure it is cold
out. I will leave a clean fire ring, or remove all
evidence of my fire.
Be Considerate in the Outdoors.
I will treat public and private property
with respect. I will follow the
principles of Leave No Trace
for all outdoor activities.
Be Conservation-Minded.
I will learn how to prac-
tice good conservation
of soil, waters, forests,
minerals, grasslands,
wildlife, and energy.
I will urge others to
do the same.


86 FISHING
Protecting Gamefish Resources.
Leave No Trace
To ensure a healthy future for ourselves and our environment,
we must do more than simply pick up litter. We must learn
how to maintain the integrity and character of the outdoors.
Leave No Trace is a set of rules, but it is also an awareness and
an attitude. Along with the Outdoor Code, the seven Leave No
Trace principles offer guidelines to follow at all times. These
guidelines apply to fishing as well as hiking, camping, or any
other outdoor activity.
1. Plan Ahead and Prepare. Proper planning and preparation
for a fishing trip helps ensure a safe and enjoyable experi-
ence while minimizing damage to natural and cultural
resources. Anglers who plan ahead can avoid unexpected
situations and minimize their impact by complying with
area game and fish laws, such as size and catch limits, tackle
and bait regulations, and seasonal restrictions. Failure to
know and obey these laws can lead to an arrest and a fine.
Be sure to obtain a fishing license if necessary and any other
needed permits or permission before heading out on your
fishing adventure.
2. Travel and Camp on Durable Surfaces. Whether you fish
for a few hours or an entire day, or you plan to camp and
fish, it is important to minimize your impact on the land.
Damage to land occurs when visitors trample vegetation or
communities of organisms beyond recovery. The resulting
barren areas develop into undesirable trails, campsites, and
fishing spots and cause soil to erode. If fishing from shore in
high-use areas, concentrate activity where vegetation is
already absent. Minimize resource damage by using existing
trails and selecting designated or existing fishing areas.
Obtain information concerning geography, water levels,
and weather where you plan to fish so that you are not
caught off guard by a storm or rugged terrain. Allow
ample time to travel to and from your desired fishing
spot, whether on the water or the shore. Take along the
proper clothing, equipment, and tackle for the type of
fishing you plan to do. It is also helpful to schedule
your outing to avoid times of high use.
If fishing on
the water, be
sure to use the
appropriate boat
launch location.


FISHING 87
.Protecting Gamefish Resources
Using a float tube
or waders is a
good way to
minimize your
impact. These
devices leave little
or no lasting
impact and allow
you better access
to the fish.
If camping overnight, always camp at least 200 feet from
shorelines. Keep campsites small by arranging tents in close
proximity. If you are camping and cooking that day’s catch,
disperse tents and cooking activities. Move camp daily to avoid
creating permanent-looking campsites. Always choose the most
durable surfaces available: rock, gravel, sand, compacted soil,
dry grasses, or snow.
It is especially important to avoid impacting stream banks
and lakesides. The area that is immediately adjacent to a stream
or river is called the riparian zone. These zones supply food,
cover, and water for a diverse number of animals, both in and
out of the water. They also serve as migration routes and forest
connectors between habitats for a variety of wildlife, especially
birds. In addition, riparian zones generally contain more
diversity and are more productive in plant growth and animal
species than land farther away from the water.
These guidelines apply to most alpine settings and may
be different for other areas, such as deserts. Learn the
Leave No Trace techniques for your specific activity or
destination. Check with land managers to be sure of the
proper technique.


88 FISHING
Protecting Gamefish Resources.
3. Dispose of Waste Properly. Pack it in; pack it out. This
simple yet effective saying motivates outdoor visitors to take
their trash home with them. Inspect your fishing spot, boat,
or campsite for trash or spilled foods. Accept the challenge
of packing out all trash, leftover food or bait, and used or
broken fishing line. Use designated fish cleaning areas or
check with the local game and fish officials if you will be
fishing in a more remote area.
You must properly dispose of any fish entrails or
bodily waste in solid waste facilities or by burying them
in a cathole. A cathole should be dug 6 to 8 inches deep
in humus soil and should be at least 200 feet from water,
trails, and campsites.
If cooking in the backcountry, strain food particles
from the dishwater and disperse the wastewater at least
200 feet from springs, streams, and lakes. Pack out the
strained food particles or bury in a cathole as shown.
Biological Leave
No Trace:
Be sure to not
dispose of any
monofilament or
braided fishing
line on the ground
where birds,
mammals,
amphibians and
reptiles can be
entangled. Never leave used fishing line to decompose.
Monofilament and braided line can persist in the
environment for many years, so make every effort to
retrieve broken line and snagged hooks. Dispose of
used or broken line responsibly by packing it out with
the rest of your trash.


FISHING 89
.Protecting Gamefish Resources
4. Leave What You Find. Allow others a sense of discovery, and
preserve the past. Leave rocks, plants, animals, archaeological
artifacts, and other objects as you find them. Examine but do
not touch cultural or historical structures and artifacts that
you may stumble across. It may be illegal to remove artifacts.
Good fishing spots are found, not made, unless a stream
restoration permit is obtained. Avoid altering a site, digging
trenches, or building structures. Never hammer nails into trees,
hack at trees with hatchets or saws, or damage bark and roots
by tying horses to trees for extended periods. Replace surface
rocks or twigs that have
been cleared from the
fishing spot or campsite.
On high-impact sites,
clean the area and dismantle
inappropriate user-built facili-
ties such as log seats or tables
and multiple fire rings.
Never transfer
fish from one
watershed to
another. This can
cause the spread
of disease and
invasive species.


90 FISHING
Protecting Gamefish Resources.
5. Minimize Campfire Impacts. If you plan to cook what
you catch while on a fishing trip, consider the potential for
resource damage. Some people would not think of cooking
or camping in the outdoors without a campfire. Yet the
naturalness of many areas has been degraded by overuse
of fires and increasing demand for firewood. A low-impact
alternative is to use a lightweight camp stove. Stoves are
fast, eliminate the need for firewood, and make cleanup
after meals easier.
If you build a fire, keep it small. Whenever possible,
use an existing fire ring and dead and downed wood
that can be broken easily by hand. Choose not to have
a fire in areas where wood is scarce, and when possible,
burn all wood to ash and remove all unburned trash
and food from the fire ring. Be certain all wood and
campfire debris is cold out.
Practice
catch-and-release
fishing to help
ensure quality
fishing for future
anglers. The motto,
“Limit your kill;
don’t kill your
limit” should be
part of every
Leave No
Trace experience.


FISHING 91
.Protecting Gamefish Resources
6. Respect Wildlife. Help keep wildlife wild. While fishing,
chances are you will encounter other wildlife as well, on the
shore or in the water. Avoid disturbing animals by observing
them from afar and giving them a wide berth. You are too
close if an animal alters its normal activities. Never feed
wildlife (except the fish you’re trying to catch, of course!).
Store food and garbage securely to avoid attracting
wildlife. Be respectful of any catch-and-release areas, and
return unharmed to the water any fish that you do not
plan to eat, are too small or too big to legally keep, or that
exceed the designated bag limit.
7. Be Considerate of Other Visitors. Thoughtful anglers respect
other visitors and protect the quality of their experience. The
following are a few tenets of outdoor ethics:
• Travel in small groups. If camping, do so in groups no larger
than that prescribed by the land managers.
• Let nature’s sounds prevail. Keep the noise down and leave
radios, music players, and pets at home. Fish can be spooked
by such interruptions. In bear country, however, being a bit
talkative on the trail might help prevent a surprise encounter
with a bear.
• Select fishing spots and campsites away from other groups to
help preserve their solitude and their chances of catching fish.
• Always travel quietly to avoid disturbing other visitors. If
fishing from a watercraft, take care not to disturb other
anglers’ efforts on the water.
• Respect private property and leave gates (open or closed)
as found.
The Leave No Trace principles might seem unimportant
until you consider the combined effects of millions of outdoor
visitors. With the use of designated wilderness areas steadily
increasing over the last 50 years, leaving no trace is everyone’s
responsibility. Use judgment and experience to tailor outdoor
activities to the environment. Forest, mountain, seashore,
plains, freshwater, and wetland environments all require differ-
ent minimum-impact practices. Whether outdoors for sport or
leisure, you are nature’s guest; remember to act accordingly
while there.


92 FISHING
Glossary.
Glossary
auger. A tool used in ice fishing to bore holes in the ice.
bag limit. The number of fish you are legally allowed to keep.
balance. The state in which the rod, reel, and line are correctly
matched to handle a given-weight lure or bait. Balance allows
an angler to deliver the lure or bait with accuracy within any
desired distance.
bass bug. A type of bass lure made to resemble bugs, frogs,
mice, or anything else edible that might fall into the water.
It is tied with cork or hair bodies so that they will float easily.
boil. An eruption on the water’s surface caused by minnows
skipping from the water in an attempt to escape fish below on
the feed. Boils are a signal of the presence of gamefish.
creel. A canvas bag or willow basket made to hold trout that
have been gilled and gutted.
downrigger. A wire line with heavy lead weights used to get
lures deep when trolling for lake trout and salmon.
fishhook. A barbed or barbless steel wire hook used to
catch fish.
float. Keep baits at the correct depth and help detect a bite.
Plastic bobbers are popular but only marginally effective.
Vertical floats are more effective and will produce more fish.
fly. A type of lure made of hair, feathers, wool, chenille, or other
materials and held together with thread and glue. A fly is hand-
tied to represent insects, baitfish, or other natural food items.
fly-fishing. A method of fishing in which a specialized long,
flexible rod, a reel, and line are used to cast an artificial fly.
jig. A hook with a weight molded into the head. Also called
a leadhead.
landing net. A net used to land, or bring in, a fish; it helps
ensure that the fish will not slip and get loose.
level fly line. Inexpensive fly line that may be used for trolling.
Generally not recommended for fly casters.


FISHING 93
.Glossary
lure. Artificial bait used for catching fish.
plug. A type of artificial lure that usually resembles a minnow
or frog and is made of plastic or wood. It is available in three
different styles: floating-diving, deep-running, and surface.
poach. To kill or take game or fish illegally.
rig. The terminal tackle used for live bait fishing.
sinker. A weight used to sink the bait down to the fish. There
are various types designed for different types of fishing. Sinkers
are typically made of lead, but environmentally friendly
versions are made of alternative materials such as rock,
ceramics, iron, steel, and bismuth.
spinners. A type of thin, metal lure that has a hole drilled in
one end and is mounted on a strip of wire. It is usually rigged
up with hair flies, feather streamers, or live bait.
spinning. A form of casting that uses a fixed-spool reel and a
spring-operated pickup arm; the line is controlled with the index
finger of the casting hand. Long casts can be made effortlessly
because there is no movable spool. Also called spin-casting.
spoon. A shiny metal lure that imitates minnows by creating
wobbling actions in the water; it is shaped like the lower part
of a teaspoon.
stringer. A string, wire, or chain (often with snaps) used to
string fish on the side of a boat and keep them alive in the water.
swivel. A device that connects to a hook, lure, or leader
and allows the bait to revolve without twisting the line.
tackle. A general term for fishing equipment such as the
rod, reel, line, lures, etc.
tackle box. A carrying case for lines, leaders, hooks, lures,
reels, and other pieces of fishing equipment.
tapered fly leader. A monofilament line used for fly-fishing,
this terminal line is thicker at the fly line and tapered to the fly
end. The tapered diameter aids in casting light flies
and having them land lightly on the water.
terminal tackle. A lure, plug, fly, or baited hook tied at
the end of the fishing line.
weight-forward fly line. Used for fly-fishing, this highly
recommended type of line is heaviest near the terminal end,
just before the leader. It gives added weight to cast any fly,
including large streamer flies or cork-bodied bass bugs.
Y bones. The bones that lie embedded in the meat along
a pike’s spine; they are shaped like the letter Y.
Stringer
Spinners
Tackle box
Lure


94 FISHING
Fishing Resources.
Fishing Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys, Scouts BSA
Handbook for Girls, Conservation Handbook,
and Fieldbook; Camping, Cooking,
Environmental Science, First Aid, Fish and
Wildlife Management, Fly-Fishing, Kayaking,
Lifesaving, Soil and Water Conservation,
and Swimming merit badge pamphlets
Books
Baron, Frank P. What Fish Don’t Want You to
Know: An Insider’s Guide to Freshwater
Fishing. Ragged Mountain Press, 2004.
Bashline, Sylvia. The New Cleaning &
Cooking Fish: The Complete Guide
to Preparing Delicious Freshwater Fish.
Creative Publishing International, 1999.
Circle, Homer. Bass Wisdom. Lyons Press, 2000.
Earnhardt, Tom. Boats for Fishermen.
Lyons Press, 2001.
Kaminsky, Peter, and Greg Schwipps.
Fishing for Dummies, 2nd ed.
John Wiley & Sons Inc., 2011.
Maas, Dave. Kids Gone Fishin’. Creative
Publishing International, 2001.
National Audubon Society. National Audubon
Society Field Guide to Fishes: North
America, 2nd ed. Knopf, 2002.
Pfeiffer, C. Boyd. The Complete Book of
Rod Building and Tackle Making. Lyons
Press, 2013.
Rosko, Milt. The Complete Book of Saltwater
Fishing. Burford Books, 2013.
Schultz, Ken. Ken Schultz’s Fishing
Encyclopedia: Worldwide Angling Guide.
IDG Books Worldwide, 2000.
Sousa, Robert J. Learn to Fly Fish in 24 Hours.
Ragged Mountain Press, 2006.
Vick, Noel. Fishing on Ice. Human
Kinetics, 1999.
Wilson, Geoff. Geoff Wilson’s Complete Book
of Fishing Knots and Rigs. Australian
Fishing Network, 2015.
DVDs
Casts That Catch Fish. On the Fly
Productions, 2010.
Joan Wulff’s Dynamics of Fly Casting.
Miracle Productions, 2001.
Scout Life Fishing Site
fishing.scoutlife.org
Scouting America Fishing Site
scouting.org/outdoor-programs/fishing
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


FISHING 95
.Fishing Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Sportfishing Association
1001 North Fairfax St., Suite 501
Alexandria, VA 22314
Telephone: 703-519-9691
asafishing.org
Catskill Fly Fishing Center
and Museum
1031 Old Route 17
Livingston Manor, NY 12758
Telephone: 845-439-4810
cffcm.com
Fly Fishers International
5237 U.S. Highway 89 South, Suite 11
Livingston, MT 59047
Telephone: 406-222-9369
flyfishersinternational.org
Future Fisherman Foundation
5998 North Pleasant View Road
Ponca City, OK 74601
Telephone: 330-993-0014
futurefisherman.org
International Game Fish Association
300 Gulf Stream Way
Dania Beach, FL 33004
Telephone: 954-927-2628
igfa.org
Izaak Walton League of America
707 Conservation Lane
Gaithersburg, MD 20878
Telephone: 301-548-0150
iwla.org
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Fisheries
1315 East-West Highway
Silver Spring, MD 20910
Telephone: 301-427-8029
fisheries.noaa.gov
National Park Service
1849 C St., NW
Washington, DC 20240
Telephone: 202-208-6843
nps.gov
Trout Unlimited
1777 N. Kent St., Suite 100
Arlington, VA 22209-2404
Toll-free telephone: 800-834-2419
tu.org
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
1849 C St., NW
Washington, DC 20240
Toll-free telephone: 800-344-9453
fws.gov
Fly Fishers International, International
Game Fish Association, and Trout
Unlimited have each signed a
memorandum of mutual support with
Scouting America that emphasizes an
ongoing relationship to promote
mutually beneficial programs for
recreational fishing.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Douglas Precourt;
Robert J. Sousa, Ph.D., U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service (retired); and Ben Jelsema, volunteer
Scouter, for preparing this revised version of
the Fishing merit badge pamphlet. Sousa and
Jelsema have put in countless hours through
the years as coordinators of the fishing
programs for the national Scout jamborees.
Thanks also to Howard Kern, Master Leave
No Trace Trainer, for his valuable assistance.
We are grateful to Howard E. Evans,
Ph.D., and Edward Brothers of Ithaca, N.Y.,
for their expertise and invaluable input, and
to Bob Cary, who wrote and illustrated the
previous edition of the pamphlet, upon
which this edition was based. Several of his
illustrations remain in this edition. Thanks
also to Trout Unlimited for its support.
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National Merit
Badge Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.


96 FISHING
Fishing Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Brand X Pictures, Bugs and Insects CD—
page 14 (wasp)
Getty Images—pages 19, 24, 26, 40, 43, 45,
73, and 75
Dan Roberts, courtesy—pages 8, 77
(filleting), and 85
Robert Sousa, courtesy—page 29 (grayling)
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/Scott
Bauer, Bugwood.org, courtesy
—page 14 (attached ticks)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, courtesy
—cover (fish, bottom left); pages 23, 29
(top), and 83
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Duane Raver—
pages 22 (all), 31 (walleye), 33 (bluegill),
34 (largemouth bass), 35 (striped bass),
36 (catfish), 39 (brook and rainbow
trout), and 43 (both)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Timothy
Knepp, courtesy—page 38 (both)
Wilkipedia.org, courtesy—pages 20 (bear),
22 (lily pads), 24 (stream), 35
(smallmouth bass), 33 (rock bass), 37
(pike), 78 (fish and rice), 80, 82, 84, and
89 (backcountry)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—cover (tackle box, floating dive
plug, spoon, jig); pages 31 (bobber), 51
(fly), 58 (all), 59, 60 (all), 63-66 (all), 67
(three artificial lures), 71-72 (all), 88
(cathole), and 93 (all)
Ben Jelsema—pages 21 (trout), 23, 36 (fish
head), 39 (fish in water), and 79 (fish
frying in pan)
John McDearmon—illustrations on pages 15,
18, 47, 49, 50, 51, 53 (arbor knot), 54
(Palomar knot), 55 (all), 56 (loop-to-loop
knot, 57 (all except circle hook), 68 (surf
rig, fish-finder rig), 69 (all), and 77 (all)
Brian Payne—pages 25 (surf fisher), 28, 46,
and 74 (boots)
Bruce Levitt—page 30
Roger Morgan—page 10
Randy Piland—page 88 (wastewater)
Rob Schuster—illustrations on pages 53
(improved clinch knot), 54 (uni knot, uni to
uni knot), 56 (surgeon’s knot), and 57
(circle hook)
Julie Zickefoose—illustrations on pages
19-20 (both), 22, and 24