HOME
REPAIRS


HOME REPAIRS
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
Nothing encourages pride in one’s surroundings more than
being able to improve them through one’s own initiative
and resources.
That is why the Home Repairs merit badge can be
so important to the development of a young person.
Once Scouts learn basic home repair skills and
apply them to their own environment, they will
have a lifetime resource: the ability to learn
new skills.
Home repair, however, can be
intimidating at first, especially if the Scout
lacks a role model for such activities. If
possible, provide small group activities in
which every Scout has a specific task to help
them get off to a good start.
Encourage each Scout to acquire a good set
of basic tools, and help Scouts learn to keep their tools
in one place and in good repair. That way, they will “be
prepared” to handle repairs as needed.
There is no time limit for completing the requirements.
Major tasks, such as waterproofing a basement, may be
completed in tandem with another Scout working on the
requirement, and/or with the assistance of an adult. The
majority of the work, however, should be performed by the
Scouts earning the badge.
This book provides a good overview of home-repair
projects, but it is by no means a complete reference. For some
requirements, space does not permit going into construction
details or listing all possible repair variations. Therefore, any
new construction or installation or completion of a similar
project (for example, any toilet repair or adjustment) qualifies
as achieving the requirement so long as the Scout understands
and demonstrates the basic concepts involved.
35908
ISBN 978-0-8395-3247-7
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


HOME REPAIRS 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Home-Repairs or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.
A parent,
guardian, or
the merit badge
counselor may
supervise the
Scout’s work on
any Home Repairs
requirements.


4 HOME REPAIRS


HOME REPAIRS 5
Contents
Be Prepared for Home Repairs . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Electrifying Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Water Works . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Flooring Fix-Ups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 50
All About Windows . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Home Furnishings How-Tos . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Doors and More . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Home Repairs Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78





HOME REPAIRS 7
.Be Prepared for Home Repairs
Be Prepared for
Home Repairs
There is no better way to be prepared for everyday living than
earning the Home Repairs merit badge. Successfully complet-
ing this badge’s requirements can lead to a lifetime of personal
and financial rewards.
Doing basic home repairs will give you a sense of personal
pride in your achievements and increased self-confidence. In
addition, safe and successful do-it-yourselfers can easily save a
family thousands of dollars in repair bills over the years.
Safety First: General Precautions
Throughout this book, you will find safety tips specific to the
task being described, but here are some general precautions
that every home repairer should keep in mind. Strive to incor-
porate safe practices into every project. In time, safety will
become second nature to you.
General Working Tips
• Always have enough lighting for the project.
• Keep long hair pulled back and avoid wearing jewelry or
loose clothing when working with power tools or machinery
with moving parts.
• Keep your work area clean and free of clutter.
• Choose the right ladder for the project (step ladder or
extension ladder? how long? metal, fiberglass, or wood? etc.).
Lean the top of the ladder against something solid and place
the ladder at the proper angle (one foot away from the wall
for every four feet of working ladder height) with the base
on firm, level ground.
Your first concern
during any repair
or maintenance
project should
be safety.
In the long run,
endangering your
health or safety,
or that of your
family, is much
more costly than
paying a qualified
person to do
the work.


8 HOME REPAIRS
Be Prepared for Home Repairs.
When climbing, face the ladder and use both hands—don’t
carry anything in your hands. Don’t overreach when you are
on a ladder, as it may tip and fall. Never stand on the top
two rungs of a ladder.
• Never drop tools or other objects from a height—lower them
with a rope.
• Always wear safety glasses when working with dust, heat,
flying objects, or power tools.
• Wear a disposable mask when working with odorous mate-
rials, dusts, or mists. Use a special respirator when working
with toxic substances.
• Store containers of flammable and volatile liquids, such as
paint thinner and gasoline, carefully. Keep the containers
tightly closed and away from heat or flames. Don’t use
power tools near flammable or volatile liquids; sparks from
the tools could ignite the vapors, even at a distance.
• Make sure to have working smoke detectors and fully
charged fire extinguishers in the garage and workshop,
as well as in the kitchen. They should be listed with
Underwriters Laboratories, a safety testing and
certification organization.
Asbestos Hazards
Asbestos is a mineral fiber that has been used for many years in some
building construction materials for insulation and as a fire-retardant. It
is most commonly found in older homes, in pipe and furnace insulation
materials, asbestos shingles, millboard, textured paints and other coating
materials, and floor tiles. Many remodeling activities can release airborne
asbestos fibers, which can cause serious lung and breathing diseases.
Therefore, when planning a project that involves any of these materials,
you should have them checked to see whether they may contain asbestos.
If they do, have the work done by someone who is specially trained to
work with asbestos. Contact the Environmental Protection Agency for
more information (see the resources section in this pamphlet).


HOME REPAIRS 9
.Be Prepared for Home Repairs
Safety First
Appropriate safety
gear is as important
as good tools!
The responsible
home repairer
should always
wear appropriate
safety gear—
including safety
glasses, masks,
heavy gloves,
and even ear
protection—
when needed.
A heavy-duty
safety light will
ensure that you
always have
enough light
while working.
Working With Tools
• Avoid working with power tools when you are tired or
taking any medication.
• Always read the tool manufacturer’s instructions, especially
warnings, before using a tool.
• Never carry sharp objects in your pockets; put them in
a utility belt with secure pockets and holders.
• Make sure your power tools are in good condition, and
don’t disable safety guards on power tools. When possible,
plug power tools into outlets protected with ground fault
circuit interrupters (GFCIs).
• Always work away from your body; that is, never point a
sharp object, such as a screwdriver or a chisel, toward you
as you are working.
• Never support a work piece with your leg or other body part
when sawing or using a power tool.
• Keep your hands and fingers away from the business end
of blades, cutters, and bits.
• It’s best to cut small pieces of wood or pipe off of a larger
piece. If you must work with small pieces, clamp them to
a steady work surface when sawing or drilling; use a holder
or pusher when working on a table saw or miter.
• Always remove the key from a drill chuck before starting
the drill.
A Few Good Tools: Basic Equipment
for Home Repairs
The home repair beginner needs only
a few basic tools, but they should
be of good quality. Well-made and
well-maintained tools can serve you
a lifetime, whereas cheap tools often
make work more difficult and need to
be replaced more often.


10 HOME REPAIRS
Be Prepared for Home Repairs.
Tools
These suggested tools and supplies will get you started on most home repairs.
Carpentry tools commonly used
in minor home repairs
Handy helpers for
many types of repairs
MEASURING TAPE
LEVEL
C-CLAMP
CARPENTER’S SQUARE
T-SQUARE
PHILLIPS
SCREWDRIVER
Hand-held tools
used for home repairs
WOOD
CHISEL
CROSSCUT SAW
CURVED-CLAW
HAMMER
SLOTTED
SCREWDRIVER


HOME REPAIRS 11
.Be Prepared for Home Repairs
Household tools handy for minor repair projects
UTILITY
KNIFE
PLUNGER
PAINTBRUSH
ADJUSTABLE
WRENCH
Hand and power tools used for carpentry,
electric work, and other repairs
STAPLE GUN
ELECTRIC DRILL
WIRE CUTTERS
SLIP-JOINT PLIERS


12 HOME REPAIRS
Be Prepared for Home Repairs.
Supplies
• Flashlight
• Can of lubricating oil
• Assorted nails, screws, bolts,
and washers
• Sandpaper in assorted grits,
or textures
• Steel wool in assorted grades
• Electrical tape and
masking tape
• All-purpose white glue and
wood glue (Buy special glues
for specific tasks.)
Nail Types
Common. The old standby for general
construction work.
Box. Looks a lot like the common nail but
has a narrower shank. Used with thin wood
so the wood doesn’t split.
Finishing. For finished construction work.
The head can be driven flush with the
work, or countersunk (driven below the
surface) and completely hidden with filler.
Casing. Also for finished construction
work, with a head that lends itself to
countersinking and a finished look.
Roofing. The broad head will not pull
through shingles, keeping them from
tearing loose.
Concrete. For fastening in masonry.
Should be set in one blow with a heavy
(64-ounce) hammer.


HOME REPAIRS 13
.Be Prepared for Home Repairs
The lengths of common nails are expressed in “penny” ratings—a number
followed by the letter “d,” which is the symbol for “pence” in the old
monetary system in England, where this rating system began. Nails used
to be sold by the number of pence (pennies) you needed to buy 100 nails;
therefore, you needed six pence to buy 100 6d nails.
Nail Sizes
1"
2"
3"
4"
PENNY SIZE
2D 3D 4D 6D 8D 10D 12D 16D 20D


14 HOME REPAIRS
Be Prepared for Home Repairs.
ROUND HEAD FLAT HEAD
FILLISTER HEAD OVAL HEAD
PHILLIPS
SCREWS
PLAIN SLOTTED
SCREWS
POINT
LENGTH
SHANK
SIZE HEAD
Wood Screws
DRILL BITS
1. Twist bit. All-purpose bit.
2. Spade bit. For drilling large
holes in wood.
3. Masonry bit. For boring into
brick, concrete, or plaster at
low speeds.
3
1 2
Maintaining Yard Tools
As with all tools, yard tools that are sharp
and well-maintained will make your work
easier and safer. Avoid rust by cleaning
excess dirt from tools with a wire brush,
then spraying tools with a spray lubricant
or wiping them with an oily rag after
each use.
When sharpening tools with a whet-
stone or file, hold the stone or file at an
angle and move away from the cutting
edge. Be sure to maintain the factory-set
bevel (the slant of the edge). It’s best to
have a professional sharpen saws and
other cutting tools with serrated edges.
Always replace broken or split
handles on tools. You can get replace-
ment handles at a hardware store. To
remove the old handle, file off the head
of the rivet that holds the handle in place.
Secure the new handle with the appropri-
ate type of glue and let it dry completely
before using the tool again.


HOME REPAIRS 15
.Be Prepared for Home Repairs
Storing Tools and Equipment
Storing your tools in a safe, secure place is the best way to
take care of them. Hardware stores sell an assortment of pre-
fabricated toolboxes, hangers, and pegboard that you can use
to store your tools and equipment. If you return your tools to
their proper place as soon as you are finished with a project,
you will always know where to find them again.
If your family does not have a workbench or a place to
store tools, a good way to begin this merit badge is by making
one or both.
WASHERS AND NUTS
• Flat washer. Protects the surface.
• Toothed washer (internal). A lock washer that yields
a finished look because the teeth are hidden by the
bolt head or nut.
• Spring lock/split washer. The most common lock
washer, used to prevent loosening by vibration.
• Square nut. Four-sided general-purpose nut.
• Flat square nut. Four-sided nut, smaller than a
square nut.
• Wing nut. Hand-tightened with the fingers instead of
a wrench. Ideal to use when something needs to be
removed frequently.
• Hexagonal nut. Six-sided general-purpose nut that is
sturdier than a square nut.
• Acorn nut/cap nut. Protects threads from the elements.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which means “to lessen
in force or intensity” and “to make less severe.” By taking precautions
to manage risk and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any
incident that might happen while working on home repairs.


16 HOME REPAIRS
Be Prepared for Home Repairs.
Toolbox
You can make a simple toolbox with some basic materials and
equipment. Use a pencil to mark the dimensions for all the
pieces on the plywood, and cut out the pieces with a crosscut
saw. Make the holes for the dowel using a spade bit on an
electric drill. Be sure that the bit is the same dimension as the
diameter of the dowel.3⁄4" HOLE
3
1
⁄2"
7"
7"
14
1
⁄4"
153
⁄4"
3
1
⁄2"
61
⁄2"
SIDE
(CUT TWO)
END
(CUT TWO)
BOTTOM
(CUT ONE FROM 1
⁄8-INCH HARDBOARD)
DOWEL HANDLE
TOOLBOX
TOP VIEW
Helpful “How To” Videos
This pamphlet covers many common home repair projects, but it is
likely you will encounter other jobs and projects. A popular resource to
prepare for any project is to search for an appropriate “how to” video on
YouTube. There are many channels dedicated to home repairs.


HOME REPAIRS 17
.Be Prepared for Home Repairs
Glue and nail the side pieces to the hardwood bottom.
Nail an end piece to the base and sides. Use wood glue to set
the dowel in place. Then nail the other end piece in place,
using glue again as you set the dowel.
For extra strength, use wood screws instead of nails in this
assembly, predrilling holes and then countersinking the screws.
Pegboard Storage With Work Surface
This project gives you an area for doing light work as well as
a place to hang your tools. Start with a pegboard and plywood
board of the same size. Make a frame of 1-by-4-inch or 2-by-
4-inch boards in the same dimension as the pegboard and
plywood board.
Nail or screw the pegboard to the back of the frame.
Attach the plywood work surface to the frame with a piano
hinge. Drill holes for chain hooks and secure the hooks with
nuts. Add a lightweight link chain for additional support. Use a
screen hook-and-eye or hinge clasp to close the case when you
are not using it. Secure the box onto wall studs or a staircase
with wood screws.


18 HOME REPAIRS
Be Prepared for Home Repairs.
Materials
■■ Top (two): 24 x 60 x 3⁄4-inch
plywood
■■ Shelf (one): 191⁄2 x 48 x 3⁄4-inch
plywood
■■ Top side braces (two):
2 x 4 x 21-inch lumber
■■ Top front and back braces
(two): 2 x 4 x 45-inch lumber
■■ Bottom side braces (two):
2 x 4 x 18-inch lumber
■■ Bottom front and back braces
(two): 2 x 4 x 45-inch lumber
■■ Sides (two): 21 x 27 x 1⁄4-inch
plywood
■■ Back (one): 27 x 48 x 1⁄4-inch
plywood
■■ No. 14 x 3-inch flat-head
wood screws
■■ 6d nails
■■ White glue
■■ Wood putty (optional)
2" X 4"
GLUE UPPER LAYER
TO BOTTOM LAYER.
1"
NO. 14 X 3" FLAT-HEAD
WOOD SCREWS
SHELF
5'
2"
24"
2'3"
NAIL THE TOP PANEL TO THE FRAME
WITH 6D NAILS, COUNTERSINKING
THEM AND FILLING THE HOLES WITH
WOOD PUTTY.
48"
NO. 14 X 3" FLAT-HEAD WOOD SCREWS
2'8"
Work bench,
exploded view
21"


HOME REPAIRS 19
.Be Prepared for Home Repairs
Workbench
Make a handy temporary bench for heavy work by placing a
2-inch-thick plywood board over two sawhorses. Nail the board
to the sawhorses for stability. For a more permanent bench with
a storage shelf, make the one shown here. If you use it against
a wall, allow 2 feet of clearance at both ends for large work.
If you use it in the center of the shop, supply electricity from
above so that you won’t trip on extension cords as you work.
Preparing the Pieces
Step 1—Mark a 4-by-8-inch sheet of 3
⁄4-inch
plywood according to the panel diagram
shown. Mark the side and back dimensions
on 1
⁄4-inch plywood.
Step 2—Cut out the top and shelf pieces with
a handsaw or circular saw. Notch the corners
of the shelf. Cut the side and back pieces.
Step 3—Cut the legs and braces according to the dimensions
shown. In one end of each of the four legs, cut a notch
31
⁄2 inches deep and 11
⁄2 inches in. Predrill screw holes for
the top side braces (you will countersink the screws).
Assembling the Frame
Step 1—Screw the top side braces to the legs.
Step 2—Fasten the bottom side braces to the legs with
glue, and then screw the braces to the legs.
Step 3—Glue and nail one side panel to one leg assembly.
Step 4—Glue and screw the front and back braces to the
legs at the top and bottom.
Completing the Bench
Step 1—Install the lower shelf in the frame through the
open end. Glue and nail it in place.
Step 2—Center the smaller of the two top panels on the
frame. Glue and nail them in place.
Step 3—Glue and nail the back panel and remaining side
panel in place.
Step 4—Center the larger top panel on the bench. Glue it,
weight it down, and allow it to dry overnight.
3⁄4" PLYWOOD
TOP
TOP
SHELF
Panel diagram
SIDE BRACE
FRONT OR
BACK BRACE
LEG
Bottom brace corner





HOME REPAIRS 21
.Electrifying Projects
Electrifying Projects
Safety First
Electricity is dangerous. Respect it by following these
simple rules.
Turn Off the Juice
• Always shut off or disconnect power at the main
service panel (fuse or circuit breaker box) before
handling wires; working on a switch, plug, or outlet;
or opening a junction box.
• Always unplug an electric object or power tool before
working on it.
• Never work on a live circuit. Use a meter or tester to check
that the circuit you are working on is not live.
• Don’t trust labels on circuits; the circuits may have been
changed, but the labels may not reflect those changes.
• Never work in the dark; use a flashlight
whenever necessary.
Keep It Dry
• Never stand on a damp or wet floor when working at the
fuse or circuit breaker box, or when using power tools.
Stand on a rubber mat or a piece of dry wood. Never work
with electricity when you are wet; be safe and change into
dry clothes.
• Never touch any plumbing when working in or around a
fuse or circuit breaker box. Wear rubber-soled shoes.
Leave Conducting for Trains
• When replacing fuses, work with one hand, keeping the
other behind your back or in your pocket to prevent electric-
ity from making a complete circuit through your chest.


22 HOME REPAIRS
Electrifying Projects.
• Lines coming into service panels remain live even when a
main breaker is turned off or main fuses are removed. Never
open a service panel. Consult a qualified electrician if you
suspect a problem with the service panel.
• Unusually warm or hot switches or receptacles may indicate
an unsafe wiring condition. Unplug cords from such recepta-
cles and do not use the switches. Have an electrician check
the wiring as soon as possible.
• Never use a metal ladder when working with electricity.
Metal conducts electricity; if you touch metal while also
touching a live wire, electrical current will flow through
your body.
Watch Your Cords
• Never substitute an extension cord for permanent wiring.
• Never use damaged cords, and be careful not to fold or
crimp cords too tightly. Unplug extension cords when you
are finished using them.
• Never plug two extension cords together; use one cord that
is the correct length. Make sure the extension cord you
use matches the cord of the tool (for example, three-prong
grounded or double-insulated).
• Never run extension cords through doorways or windows,
or under carpets. Never fasten them to walls or baseboards;
even though staples are sold for this purpose, it is not
a safe practice.
Think Safety
• Never push yourself when working on any electrical project.
Make sure you give yourself the time to think the project
through completely; mistakes can happen when you
rush projects.
• Above all, use good judgment when planning your project;
if you don’t feel comfortable, leave the job to a qualified
electrician and insist that he or she follow appropriate
electrical codes.
Underwriters
Laboratories
Inc. (UL) is an
independent, not-
for-profit product
safety testing
and certification
organization.
A UL label or
stamp (above)
means that the
product meets
nationally
recognized safety
standards. Look
for this label
when purchasing
any electrical
products.


HOME REPAIRS 23
.Electrifying Projects
Good Working Practices
In addition to following the safety rules, it is a good idea to use
good working practices. When working with electrical wires,
label them as you work to keep track of them. Number them
and write down where they are attached and to what.
Also, fold wires neatly back into the box when repairing or
replacing switches and receptacles. Running electrical tape
around the switch under the mounting screws will protect the
wire connections.
Always use the proper tools, with insulated handles, for the
job. For example, use wire strippers or wire cutters (diagonal
pliers) to strip wire and avoid damaging wires. A multipurpose
electrical tool both cuts wires and strips the insulation from
them. Wire gauges printed on the tool show which hole to use
so that you don’t damage the wire.
The Basics of Electricity
The most common electrical service to homes in the United
States is 240 volts. The amperage, or strength of the electric
current, in any home can vary.
Modern homes may have 200 amps
or more, whereas older city homes
may have as little as 60 amps or
even less. Your main breaker or
fuses will indicate how many amps
are in your home.
Electrical current, or the rate of flow
of electricity, is measured in amperes;
the pressure that forces the current
through a conductor is measured in
volts; and the power of the electrical
current is measured in watts.
Stripping insulation with a
multipurpose electrical tool


24 HOME REPAIRS
Electrifying Projects.
The main electrical service entrance to your home is
through a service panel containing fuses, circuit breakers, or
both. The panel usually is located in the basement or utility
room, or in a closet on an outside wall. An older home can
have more than one service entrance, and many homes have
additional disconnect panels for outside supplies, such as air-
conditioner compressors.
Replacing a Fuse
Fuses are rated by amperes, or amps. Never replace a fuse
with one that has the improper amperage rating or size. A
switch box could have several different types of fuses, all of
which can be replaced by simply removing the defective fuse
and putting a new one in its place. Unscrew the blown fuse by
touching only the glass end. Then screw in the replacement,
touching the glass end only.
• Plug fuses (15 to 30 amps) look like flattened screw-in light
bulbs and have a metal filament under a small glass win-
dow. If the window is blackened or discolored, the fuse may
be defective.
• Cartridge fuses are cylindrical. Cap-ended cartridge fuses are
rated up to 60 amps and are for circuits with high-current
appliances such as stoves, dryers, and ovens. Prong-ended
cartridge fuses protect main electrical services and are rated
up to 600 amps. It is rare, but possible, for them to fail.
• Dual-element, time-delay fuses have a springlike mechanism
that allows for brief electrical surge overloads without the
fuse blowing. They are useful on circuits that have heavy
motors, such as refrigerators and power tools, because they
create a brief power surge upon start-up.
• S fuses come in two pieces: a separate metal base, which
screws into the fuse outlet, and the fuse itself, which matches
the base. This system helps prevent the wrong fuse from
being used on a particular circuit since the fuse and base
must match.
Circuit breaker
fuses have a reset
button or switch.
When blown, they
can be reactivated
with the button
or switch. Push
the switch to the
“off” position,
then back to the
“on” position.
Toggles in a circuit breaker flip to “off” or to a center
position for both short circuits and circuit overloads.
To reset the circuit and restore power, flip the switch
to full “off” and then back to “on.”


HOME REPAIRS 25
.Electrifying Projects
When the Lights Go Out
When electricity fails in only one part of the house, it is
probably because of an overload or short circuit in the system.
An overload occurs when too many appliances or lights are
plugged into one circuit. A short circuit is caused by a bare
electrical wire touching another bare wire or a piece of metal.
In either case, the problem has tripped the breaker or blown
a fuse. You can restore electricity by resetting the breaker or
replacing the fuse, but first, unplug all appliances and lamps
on the circuit. If the electricity fails again while everything is
disconnected, call an electrician—the problem is in the wiring.
If the electricity remains on after you have reset breakers
and/or replaced fuses, replug appliances and lights one at a
time. Check for frayed cords and melted plugs or sockets that
could be the source of a short. Do not reconnect any damaged
cords or plugs.
Replacing Electrical Cords
When electrical cords on lamps or small appliances become
broken or frayed, replace them with one of the same length,
gauge, and type as the original cord. Avoid making a quick fix
using electrical tape.
How to replace a wire
or cord will depend on the
appliance you are repairing.
Begin by removing the screw
or screws on the appliance
housing or backplate to access
the internal electrical connec-
tions. Disconnect the old cord
by unscrewing the terminal
or terminals where the cord
is attached. Strip 1
⁄2 inch of
the insulation from the wire
ends of the new cord, twist
the wire strands together, and
then hook them clockwise
around a terminal. Tighten the
terminal screws and replace
the housing or backplate.
Always unplug an
appliance or lamp
by pulling on the
plug; never pull
on the cord!


26 HOME REPAIRS
Electrifying Projects.
Repairing Plugs and Sockets
When sockets or plugs don't work, it is often because a wire
has become detached from a connector screw. Fix this problem
by simply reattaching the wire and tightening the screw. Worn
or damaged sockets and plugs, however, should be replaced.
You can buy new ones at a hardware store for a minimal cost.
Replacing a Standard Plug
Follow these three steps to replace a standard plug:
Step 1—Unplug the appliance. Cut through the cord just
behind the old plug. Slide the cord through the back of the
new plug. Split the wires and tie them into an underwriters’
knot by forming a large loop with each wire and inserting the
end of each wire through its opposing loop. To tighten the
knot, pull on the ends of the wires.
Step 2—Pull the knot into the plug’s base. Strip 3
⁄4 inch of
insulation from the end of each wire.
Step 3—Wrap the insulated portion of the wires around the
prongs to form an S. Wrap the exposed wires around the
terminals in the same direction in which the terminals turn.
Tighten the terminal screws with a screwdriver. If the plug has
a cardboard insulator, slip it in place over the prongs to protect
the wires.
Repairing a Socket
A socket is easy to take apart. If the
outer shell doesn’t readily slip off
the socket cap, apply pressure with a
screwdriver where the word “press”
is marked. Pull the cap and insulat-
ing sleeve away as you press.
If a wire connection has come
loose at a terminal screw, rewrap it
clockwise and tighten the screw. If
the socket is broken, replace it with
a new one.
OUTER
SHELL
INSULATING
SLEEVE
SETSCREW
TERMINAL
SCREWS
SOCKET
CAP
1
2
3


HOME REPAIRS 27
.Electrifying Projects
Replacing a Wall Switch
Note: This project is for a single-pole switch controlling a
light, not for multiple switches controlling a light.
A single-pole switch that controls a light from one
place has two brass-colored terminals on the switch side.
Hot wires are connected to these terminals. Before you
begin, turn off the power to that switch at the main service
panel. Remove the coverplate and gently pull the switch
out. Don’t touch any bare wire ends or switch terminals.
Use a voltage tester to make sure there is no voltage:
Touch one probe of the tester to one of the screw termi-
nals and the other probe to a ground source, such as the
metal shell of the outlet box. The tester should not light
up. Be sure to check both wires connected to the switch.
Disconnect the two switch wires and the ground wire
(a bare copper or green wire), if present. Connect the new
switch to the two hot wires you just disconnected. Attach the
ground wire to the new ground screw using a wire connector.
Remount the new switch and return it to the wall. Tighten the
screws and replace the switch cover.
Replacing a Wall Outlet
Note: Always replace an outlet with one of
the correct amperage and voltage rating.
Step 1—Turn off the circuit or main power
switch, and use a meter or circuit tester to
make sure that the power is off.
Step 2—Remove the coverplate and
unscrew the receptacle (plug).
Step 3—Remove the wires, noting where
they are connected (reconnect them in the
same order). If a tab is separated on the line
side of the plug, note the wiring, replace
the wires, and remove the tab as on the
original switch. Remove this tab if a switch
will control the plug for a lamp that will be
operated by the switch.
Step 4—Install the ground wire.
Step 5—Install the receptacle and coverplate.
Turn off the power
before working
with any switch.
NEUTRAL SLOT
(LONG)
GROUND SLOT
(ROUNDED)
NEUTRAL
TERMINALS
GROUNDING
TERMINAL
MOUNTING
YOKE
HOT SLOT
(SHORT)
HOT
TERMINAL
BREAK-OFF
SEPARATOR
TAB
HOT
TERMINAL
MOUNTING
SCREW
Grounded three-slot
120-volt duplex outlet





HOME REPAIRS 29
.Water Works
Water Works
When it comes to plumbing problems, the best tools are a
“plumber’s helper” (a plunger), a little common sense, and a
willingness to ask questions at a hardware store. Before you
know it, you will be able to handle most basic plumbing jobs.
Preventing Clogs
Help keep your household drains flowing freely by making
sure not to pour grease down them. In the bathroom, keep
drains as clear of hair as possible. Use a drain strainer if
possible. For regular maintenance, try this noncaustic and
safe alternative to commercial drain cleaners: Pour 1/4 cup of
baking soda and 1/4 cup of white vinegar down the drain; let
it sizzle for several minutes, and then flush with a kettle of
boiling water.
Plumbing bolts,
nuts, screws,
and threaded
connections can
be hard to loosen,
especially when
they are corroded.
Remember this
saying: “Clock-
wise is lockwise,”
and then be
sure you’re
twisting in the
opposite direction.
Safety First
• If you use chemical drain
cleaners to unclog a drain,
wear protective gloves and
goggles to avoid injuring your
skin or eyes.
• Keep power tools away from areas where water
has leaked. Try to contain spilled water with towels
or a wet-dry vacuum cleaner.
• If a clogged toilet contains raw sewage, or if the
sewage has overflowed onto the floor, wear rubber
gloves during cleanup to avoid the risk of contami-
nation. Make sure to sanitize the affected areas
afterward with bleach or disinfectant.


30 HOME REPAIRS
Water Works.
Clearing Clogged Drains
The drainage systems in homes have two parts: traps in the
shapes of a drum or J, S, or P, plus pipes to which the traps
are connected.
When water or waste won’t run out of a sink, tub, or
toilet, debris is blocking the route in the pipe or trap. Try
these remedies, in the order following:
1. Remove the stopper or drain cover and clean off any
accumulation of soap scum and hair with paper towels and
pipe cleaners.
2. Try a commercial drain cleaner on slow-draining sinks or
tubs. Give it plenty of time to work—a few minutes longer
than specified on the package. If the drain is still slow,
don’t risk a chemical burn by immediately trying repairs
involving augers or trap removal. Continue to use the sink
or tub so the chemical will wash away completely. Try fur-
ther repairs in a day or so.
3. Loosen a clog with suction. Petroleum jelly applied to the
base of a plunger helps seal it to the sink. Block the overflow
or adjoining sink drains with rags. Fill a sink with enough
water to cover the plunger and create more of a seal. If you
are plunging a toilet, leave enough water in the
toilet to create a seal (you can’t plunge a dry
toilet), but not so much that it overflows when
you plunge. Use steady, rhythmic, and forceful
downward strokes to clear the clog. Stroke 10
times, and then test the flow. Repeat the pro-
cedure three to five times, if necessary. Once
the water drains freely, flush the drain with hot
water for five minutes.
Use caustic
commercial drain
cleaner only as
a last resort,
and never in
a completely
clogged drain.
These products
are highly
corrosive to
plumbing systems.
The bellows-style plunger for a toilet (left) has
a narrowing plunging end to fit inside the bowl
and create a better seal; those designed for flat
drains (right) have a flat bottom to better seal a
drain in a sink, tub, or basin.


HOME REPAIRS 31
.Water Works
4. Insert a “snake,” or auger,
into the drain (or a plug
in the pipe) to dislodge a
persistent clog. If you don’t
have an auger, you can
make a crude one with a
straightened coat hanger.
Use towels underneath to
protect the surface from
chips or scratches. Don’t be
too forceful with the auger.
It could break a plastic
pipe, or a homemade one
could break off in the drain.
5. Remove the trap. If all else fails, place a
pail under the trap and open it with an
adjustable wrench. Clean the trap with a
small brush or by running a cloth through it.
Before replacing the trap, clear the pipes that
attach to either side of the trap using a snake.
Replace the trap. If the drain flows freely,
flush it with hot water.
Fixing Leaky Faucets
Leaks are the most common problem with faucets. Most leaks
are caused by worn washers or packing. Do-it-yourself repairs
are simple and inexpensive, unless you forget the first rule of
faucet repair: Turn off the water before you start! Usually,
you will find shutoff valves under the sink. If you don’t, or if
the water still runs from the faucet after you shut it off under
the sink, have an experienced adult or a plumber help you turn
off the water supply at your home’s main water-supply valve.
There are several kinds of faucets: compression, single-
lever, and cartridge (hollow metal or plastic inserts that seal
against the spout or faucet body). A compression faucet is one
of the most common types.
Faucet repair kits are sold by brand and model number
at plumbing supply and hardware stores. If you don’t know
the brand or parts you need, divide the parts into plastic bags,
maintaining the assembly and labeling the bags “hot” and
“cold.” Take the old parts with you to the store.
4
Always make sure
that water is shut
off by opening
the faucet. If
water does not
completely stop
running, an
experienced
adult or a plumber
may need to
rebuild or replace
the shutoffs.
5


32 HOME REPAIRS
Water Works.
Parts that can be replaced in most
compression bathroom, kitchen, and
laundry faucets include the seat washer,
washer screw, and packing. Repair kits
usually contain all washers, O-rings,
and packing string for a faucet, and you
should replace all the old parts with the
new ones. Begin disassembly by locat-
ing the screw that holds the handle.
Sometimes the screw is hidden by the
escutcheon, or decorative cap, which
indicates “H” for hot or “C” for cold.
Pry the cap off with the tip of a slot
screwdriver. Protect chrome finishes
by padding them with a cloth while
you work.
As you disassemble the faucet,
carefully lay each piece on a towel in
the order that you remove it so you will
know how to reassemble the object after
you have replaced the old parts. Clean
any dirt or corrosion off permanent parts
with an old toothbrush or fine steel
wool before reassembly. Dip the brush
or steel wool in vinegar to help dissolve
mineral deposits on parts.
Easy Toilet Repairs
All gravity-assist flush toilets operate
basically the same. When you flush the
toilet, the handle lifts an arm or chain
that raises the flush valve, which can be
either a ball (in older toilets) or a flap-
per. Tank water flows out of this open-
ing to flush the toilet bowl. The float
ball rides the water level down the tank
and turns on the water-intake valve
in the ballcock. At the same time, the
flush valve drops back into the open-
ing, sealing it to fill the tank again with
fresh water.
Compression faucet
SCREW
SCREW
PACKING NUT
FIBER WASHER
SEAT WASHER
STEM
CAST BODY
VALVE SEAT
HANDLE
PACKING


HOME REPAIRS 33
.Water Works
Another kind of toilet is becoming more popular, especially
with federally mandated standards for how much water a toilet
can use in one flush. Pressure-assist toilets “push” the contents
out of the toilet bowl rather than using the pulling action of
gravity in the gravity-assist toilet. Inside the china toilet tank,
you won’t find any standing water, as in a gravity-assist toilet,
so one advantage is that the tank of a pressure-assist toilet
never “sweats” in heat and humidity.
HANDLE OVERFLOW
TUBE TANK
FLOAT BALL
LIFT WIRES
FLUSH VALVE FLAPPER
FLUSH VALVE SEAT
RIM OPENINGS
TOILET
BOWL
TRAP BASE
WAX RING
CLOSET
BEND
SOIL STACK
SHUTOFF
VALVE
SUPPLY LINE
(RISER)
BALLCOCK
(WATER-INTAKE VALVE)
FLOAT ARM
A gravity-assist flush toilet with a float ball


34 HOME REPAIRS
Water Works.
Clogged Toilet
If the water in a toilet bowl rises to the rim or overflows,
something is probably blocking the channel. Follow these
steps to try clearing it with a plunger.
Step 1—Close the flush valve by hand, putting the flapper
or ball stopper back in the closed position. Then turn off the
shutoff valve at the side of the toilet.
Step 2—Drain excess water from the bowl with an old cup
or can. Leave enough water to cover the plunger cup.
Step 3—Stand in front of the toilet and plunge vigorously
about 10 times.
Sometimes you can see obstructions using a small mirror and
flashlight. With the mirror, you can look under the rim to see
whether the flush holes are clear. If they aren’t, try clearing
them with the hook end of a straightened clothes hanger. You
also can inspect the top of the trap with the mirror and flash-
light—but empty all the water out of the toilet bowl first!
The insides of gravity-assist toilets may vary. With a floating cup
ballcock (left), the position of the floating cup controls the water
level. You can adjust the water level by moving the spring clip. To
make water-level adjustments with the floatless ballcock (right),
simply turn the adjustment screw.
SPRING CLIP
ADJUSTMENT
SCREW
If the clog
persists, it's
probably time
to call a plumber.


HOME REPAIRS 35
.Water Works
Running Toilet
A running toilet, one that is constantly letting water into the
tank, is both irritating and wasteful. It is also one of the easiest
and least expensive toilet problems to fix. Drain the tank first
by turning off the water supply and then flushing. Remember
to turn the water supply back on when repairs are done.


36 HOME REPAIRS
Water Works.
Running toilets can have several causes and easy remedies:
Problem Solution
Leaking float ball Unscrew the ball to remove it, and
install a new one. If a new one is
temporarily unavailable, empty the
leaky ball, cover it with a plastic
bag, and secure the bag with tape or
a rubber band.
Float arm If the rod is keeping the water-intake
valve open, bend the rod up or
down slightly, or adjust its screw.
Leaky water intake Clean corrosion off washers and
other valve parts with a tooth-
brush dipped in vinegar, or install
new ones.
Faulty flush valve seat Raise the valve and buff the seat
with steel wool. Remove only corro-
sion, not any metal.
Worn flush valve A replacement flapper slides over
(flapper) the overflow pipe or hooks onto
lugs. If replacing a flush valve ball,
unscrew it from the lift wire. Make
sure that the new valve ball falls
squarely into the seat of the
flush valve.
Toilet tank overfills Examine the flush valve; the repair
may be as simple as replacing
the flap.
Water is going over Adjust the float arm, adjustment
the overflow tube screw, or spring clip. If the water
continues to fill past the overflow
tube, replace the fill valve.


HOME REPAIRS 37
.Water Works
Fixing Sprinkler Heads
Sprinkler heads normally are flush with the lawn so
lawn mowers don’t come in contact with them.
Water pressure raises the center portion of the
head when the system is turned on. Turning
the small screw at the center of the head
increases or decreases the flow of water.
Grass, mineral deposits, and dirt can
clog spray heads. To clean them, lift the
head by hand and insert a fine wire into
the jets. Never use a toothpick because the
wood can break off in the jets. Some spray
heads unscrew for easier cleaning.
To replace a sprinkler head, remove
the old core head with a special core
wrench, screwdriver, or adjustable wrench.
The threads turn counterclockwise.
Repairing Leaky Hoses
For temporary repair of a pinhole leak in a hose,
dry the hose and stop the hole with a heavy coat
of rubber-base cement. Wrap the hose with a
spiral of plastic electrician’s tape.
For a more permanent repair, buy a metal or
plastic hose coupling that is the same diameter
as the hose. Cut the hose cleanly and squarely; a
ragged cut may cause a leak. Install the coupling
according to package directions. For some, you
will need a hammer, but some are screw-on or
clasp-on connections.
To fix a leaky connector, unscrew it, insert a
washer, and replace the connector.
SCREW





HOME REPAIRS 39
.Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping
Wall Works, Caulking,
and Weather-Stripping
Everyone likes a freshly painted home that’s warm in the winter,
cool in the summer, and dry all year ’round. Best of all, well-
maintained walls hold up longer and keep energy costs down.
Caulking Cracks and Joints
Among energy-saving products, caulking probably
is the least expensive and most effective. All you
need is a caulking gun and the proper sealant.
Check your home for missing and cracked
caulk. Insert a putty knife into old caulking. If
it is still gummy, leave it in place. If the caulk-
ing cracks, remove it with a putty knife and wire
brush. You want a dry, dust-free surface that’s
slightly roughened so the new caulking adheres
well. Seal all these areas:
• Around windows and doors, fixed storm
windows, and cracks between door thresholds
and stoops
• On the exterior of your home—along the
bottom of siding where it meets the foundation,
and around any basement windows
• Between joints, splits, and
cracks in siding
• At dormers and roof flashing,
gable vents, and roof vents
• At power and cable entrances
and exits
• Between dissimilar materials
such as wood and masonry,
masonry and metal, etc.
When the air inside an
insulated home is warmer
than the air outside, the
warmer air releases mois-
ture as it passes through
the insulation and con-
denses into water when it
reaches the colder exterior
wall. A vapor barrier of alu-
minum foil or heavy plastic
sheeting stops this vapor
from moving beyond the
interior surface of the insu-
lation, so it never gets to a
colder wall and condenses.
BEAD
LAPS BOTH
SURFACES.
45°


40 HOME REPAIRS
Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping.
Caulking comes in many varieties, colors, and prices. Ask your
hardware dealer for the right kind for the job you are doing.
Fill wide or deep cracks with fiberglass insulation, a tarred
rope called oakum, or expandable foam insulation.
If you are using a caulking cartridge, cut the tip at a
45-degree angle and hold the gun at the same angle. Experts
disagree over whether you should “push” or “pull” a bead of
caulking as you work. Either way, move slowly so that the
caulking fills the opening completely and overlaps both surfaces.
Wipe away excess caulk with a damp rag or wet finger.
Use the same technique to prevent water leaks around
sinks and tubs. For those areas, sealant is available in
smaller dispensers.
Painting Walls and Ceilings
A fresh coat of paint will brighten any room. Most of the work
is in adequate preparation. Paint the ceiling first, then the walls,
floorboards, doors, and window trim.
Note: For more in-depth information on painting walls
and ceilings, see the Painting merit badge pamphlet.
The Right Paint for the Project
There are lots of different kinds of primers and paints. Check with someone
at a paint store to make sure you are getting the right paint for the project.
Also, always read the product label and closely follow the manufacturer’s
safety guidelines. If possible, obtain the SDS (safety data sheet) for the
product. Contact the manufacturer (check the product label) or search online
(with your parent or guardian’s permission).
• Latex paints are water-thinned and can be cleaned with soap and
water. They are good for walls and ceilings.
• Alkyd paints are oil-based and have to be thinned and cleaned with
a solvent such as turpentine. They are particularly useful in baths
and kitchens.
• Enamels, available in both latex and alkyd bases, have a harder surface
than most interior paints.


HOME REPAIRS 41
.Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping
Safety First
• When painting, make sure your work area is well-ventilated.
• Lead-based paint is a major source of lead poisoning for
children and can also affect adults. If you are remov-
ing existing paint that you think may contain lead, get it
checked by an expert. Avoid activities that will disturb
or damage any lead-based paint and create dust. State and
local health departments and housing authorities may have
lead poisoning prevention programs and information about
testing labs and contractors who can safely remove lead-
based paint.
• Basements, garages, and storage areas can contain many
tripping hazards and sharp or pointed tools that can make
a fall even more hazardous. Have light switches at each
entrance to a dark area. Keep an operating flashlight handy
in case of a power loss.
Proper Use of Hand Tools
Common hand tools include rags, sandpaper, abrasive pads,
scrapers, broad knives and putty knives, wire brushes, and
chipping hammers. Before using a scraper, brush, knife, or
hammer, wash away oil and debris with detergents or solvents.
Brush away or vacuum particles afterward.
Remember to follow these safety guidelines:
• Always wear goggles and gloves.
• Keep tools in good condition.
• Do not leave unused tools lying around.
• Never throw tools; use tools only for the purpose they
were intended.
• Avoid using tools that make sparks near combustible liquids
or vapors.
• Properly dispose of used rags frequently, and always at the
end of each day.


42 HOME REPAIRS
Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping.
Application Equipment Selection and Usage
BRUSHES
Use brushes for cutting in and painting areas that the roller
can’t reach. Try to use only quality brushes. Some brushes
may be more expensive, but they may be worth it in the end
because they will last longer and using them will give a better
overall performance as you apply paint.
A paintbrush consists of four parts: the handle, the bris-
tles, the epoxy setting that binds the bristles together, and the
ferrule, which attaches the bristles to the handle.
Select a brush that is appropriate for the job and coating
type. Use a synthetic brush when painting with latex paints.
Make sure the brush holds the bristles tightly. Use natural
bristles when using oil-based paints and varnish.
Choose brushes suitable in width for the specific project.
For large areas, use a wall brush. Select a narrow sash brush
for smaller, hard-to-get-to areas. For varnishing, use a
thinner brush.
Common Hand Tools
■■ Scrapers remove paint from
any type of surface.
■■ Use broad knives and putty
knives to apply patching mate-
rial and to scrape loose paint.
■■ Wire brushes clean debris
from all types of surfaces.
■■ Chipping hammers chip away
layers of loose surface material.
CLEANING
BRUSH
SCRAPER BROAD KNIVES PUTTY KNIVES
WIRE BRUSHES CHIPPING HAMMER
HANDLE
FERRULE
BRISTLES


HOME REPAIRS 43
.Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping
ROLLERS
Using rollers gets a paint job done
quickly. There are two types of
rollers: the more common dip
roller, which is dipped into
the paint for application;
and the fountain or pressure
roller, which has a hollow core
where the paint is stored and
pressure-fed through small
pores to the outer fabric.
The fibers on the roller covers are known
as the nap, usually described by the fiber length,
which ranges from 1
⁄4" to 13
⁄4". Generally, the rough-
er the surface you are painting, the longer the nap you should
use. The longer nap makes it possible to work paint into irregu-
lar surfaces such as concrete block and highly textured walls
like stucco.
Other equipment used with rollers includes extension
poles, which can make it easier to reach higher places; trays;
mesh grids, which are immersed in 5-gallon paint buckets to
serve the same purpose as the rough edges in a roller tray; and
special tools for cleaning roller covers.
The smoother the
surface you are
painting—and
the smoother the
finish you want—
the shorter the nap
you should use.
PAINT TRAY
ROLLER
COVERS
ROLLER
FRAME
ROLLER
FRAME
Is Your House Lead Free?
Lead-based paint can cause serious health problems.
Removing it is such a high-risk job that it is best left to a
professional. Structures built prior to 1978 are likely to have
been painted with lead-based paint. Ask your parent or guardian when
your house was built. If it was before 1978, or if they are not certain when
it was built, do not attempt to use your house as a project.
Never attempt to remove lead-based paint yourself.
Contact the Environmental Protection Agency for more information
(see the resources section in this pamphlet).


44 HOME REPAIRS
Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping.
PADS
Paint pads are rectangular foam pads covered with fabric and
set in a plastic holder. These pads, with their straight sides, are
useful for painting areas like the space between the ceiling and
doorframe as well as exterior siding.
Preparation
Preparing for painting is as important as the painting itself.
If you don’t prepare correctly, the paint may not bond well
to the surface.
Fill any minor cracks or holes with surfacing compound and
allow it to dry thoroughly. Use sandpaper to level and smooth
the patches. Because surfacing compound shrinks as it dries,
you may need a second application. You may also need to tex-
turize the second application to match the wall or ceiling tex-
ture. Again, allow your work to dry thoroughly before painting.
Make sure that all surfaces are clean, dry, and free of dust.
This is particularly important—even fingerprints can prevent
paint from adhering well! Use a heavy-duty household deter-
gent to wash all areas to be painted.
Cover light fixtures and doorknobs with plastic bags, and
protect floors and furniture with drop cloths. Use masking tape
around the edges of woodwork. Remove switch plates and tape
heavy paper over jacks, plugs, and switches, or disconnect the
power to the room.
Here is how to determine the amount of paint needed for a rectangular
or square wall. Multiply the height and the width.
Example: 8' height × 20' width = 160 square feet
To determine the area of a room, multiply the height and the width for
each wall, then add the total for each wall.
Example: 8' height × 20' width = 160 square feet for wall 1
8' height × 20' width = 160 square feet for wall 2
8' height × 15' width = 120 square feet for wall 3
8' height × 15' width = 120 square feet for wall 4
160 + 160 + 120 + 120 = 560 square feet total
You will need enough paint to cover 560 square feet. You probably will
need a little less than 2 gallons for the room.


HOME REPAIRS 45
.Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping
Painting Basics
• Read the label on the paint can before purchasing. Calculate
the area you want to paint and compare that with the label
to know how much paint to buy.
• Stir paint thoroughly.
Strain any impurities
through cheesecloth or
old nylon hosiery.
• “Cut in” edges with a
brush—that is, paint
a strip about 2 inches
wide in corners and
along edges where the
same color of paint
will meet.
• Use a sturdy ladder to
reach high areas.
• Use a roller for walls
and ceilings, with an extension rod for high areas. Pour the
paint into a roller pan, about half an inch deep. Distribute
the paint evenly around the roller.
• Work across the narrowest part of ceilings. Spread paint on
the walls from the top down.
• With a full roller, spread paint in a large W or M pattern on
one section of a wall or ceiling. Go over the area in several
directions and smooth all edge marks from
the roller. Use up all the paint on the roller
before reloading (resoaking) it.
Cleanup
• Keep a damp rag and a dry rag handy
while you’re painting. Wipe away drips
and splatters as they occur.
• Clean latex paint out of a metal roller
pan with soapy water. Disposable plastic
liners are available for metal pans. If the
pan is plastic, let the paint dry and peel
it away later.
• Clean paintbrushes thoroughly after
each use.


46 HOME REPAIRS
Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping.
Waterproofing a Basement
These instructions are for unpainted, untreated basement walls.
If your basement is painted, you must strip off the paint before
you begin waterproofing.
Step 1—Prepare the walls as for painting, that is, cover all
electrical sockets, etc.
Step 2—Using a broom or stiff scrub brush, clean any mildew
from walls with a mixture of 3 quarts hot water, 2
⁄3 cup trisodi-
um phosphate (TSP, available at hardware stores), and 1 quart
chlorine bleach. Wear gloves as you work with this mixture.
Step 3—After the wall is clean and dry, use a paintbrush to
apply a premixed, concrete-based latex waterproofing com-
pound. Make sure you fill in all the tiny cracks and pores.
Step 4—Allow the wall to dry, and apply a second coat.
Environmental Responsibility
Using chemicals comes with a risk for polluting the environment. Take
care in all steps of painting and handling materials. Always dispose of
any chemical material according to the manufacturer’s instructions and
local laws.
Air and Water Pollution. Local, state, and federal regulations apply
to hazardous material disposal, so ask your merit badge counselor
about regulations that may affect your project. The local Environmental
Protection Agency office (look in the blue pages of the phone book) can
tell you more about environmental regulations in your area.
Never remove old paint that may contain lead. Doing so may harm the
environment and put yourself and others at risk. Particles can disperse into
the air or settle on the ground, threatening the health of anyone nearby.
Lead-contaminated earth can be lethal. Contact a qualified professional
painting contractor for projects where lead-based paint may be present.
Proper Disposal Procedures. Sweep or vacuum any particles of old paint
you remove, and properly dispose of this waste. To dispose of leftover
paint, remove the lid and allow the paint to completely harden. Replace
the lid and throw the can away. This way, the paint will not escape the can
and contaminate the environment.


HOME REPAIRS 47
.Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping
Weather Stripping
Doors and windows that are tightly fitted and properly weather-
stripped help prevent costly heat loss from a home. Weather
stripping comes in a variety of materials, including metal, vinyl,
and foam. For heavily used doors and windows, nail-on weather
stripping holds up better than self-adhesive types, saving time
and money in the long run.
Replacing Weather Stripping on a Door
Jamb weather stripping seals the space along the sides and top
of the door. Sill weather stripping keeps drafts or water from
entering underneath the door.
JAMB WEATHER STRIPPING
Step 1—Always start with a clean, smooth, and dry surface.
Remove old weather stripping if necessary. Clean the door jamb
with soap and water (especially if you are using self-adhesive
stripping). Allow the jamb to dry completely.
Step 2—Cut the top piece of
weather stripping first, fitting it to
the corners of the doorstops. Then
cut the side pieces to ensure a
snug fit at top and bottom. Allow
for a gap at the strike plate by the
door knob.
Step 3—Start with the top piece.
If you are using the nail-on type
stripping, nail the trim to the jamb
using 4d nails. If you are using
self-adhesive stripping, position the
weather stripping before peeling
off the paper backing. Check to
be sure that the weather stripping
compresses slightly against the
closed door. If it compresses too
little or too much, it does no good.
For added
protection, apply
a thin ribbon of
caulk to nail-on
weather stripping
before fitting and
nailing in place.


48 HOME REPAIRS
Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping.
SILL WEATHER STRIPPING
After the jamb weather stripping is installed, seal the bottom of the door with a
door sweep. High carpeting or an uneven floor may block a standard door sweep.
In these cases, consider installing a hinged sweep instead.
Step 1—Cut the sweep to length. When
working on the side of the door with the
stops, cut the material 1
⁄8 inch short so
that it clears the stops.
Step 2—Adjust and position the sweep
to seal firmly but not too tightly against
the threshold.
Step 3—Tack both ends of the sweep to
the door. Use screws or nails to secure
the sweep in place.
Replacing Weather Stripping on a Window
When weather-stripping windows, gasket-type materials are easy to install but may
wear out quickly. It should be used only along the sash where friction will not occur.
Always start with a clean, dry surface.
Pressure sensitive weather stripping, such as the self-adhesive type,
should be used only on the areas where friction does not occur. On
windows, this means it can be used on the upper sash and lower sash,
but not on the sides. If you were to apply pressure-sensitive weather
stripping to the sides, opening and closing the window would be
difficult and cause the weather stripping to pull loose.
1
2
3


HOME REPAIRS 49
.Wall Works, Caulking, and Weather-Stripping
GASKET-TYPE WEATHER
STRIPPING
Rolled vinyl and felt are the most
common choices for gasket-type
weather stripping. Felt weather
stripping must be installed on the
inside of windows. Other types
can be installed on the exterior,
where they are less obvious and
provide a better seal.
Step 1—Cut the weather strip-
ping to the length of the sash.
Step 2—Attach the weather strip-
ping so that it compresses slightly
when the window is latched.
For double-hung windows:
Step 1—Attach the strips to the outside face of the sashes.
Step 2—Seal between the sashes by attaching a strip to the
bottom of the upper sash.
Step 3—Seal the top and bottom sashes by attaching a strip to
the outside of the upper sash’s top rail and of the lower sash’s
bottom rail.
For casement windows, attach weather stripping to the sash or
the casing, whichever makes a tighter seal.
In windows, the
sash refers to the
framework that
holds a pane of
glass. So, a
double-hung
window has two
sashes, or parts.
Spring Metal Weather Stripping
Some older homes use spring metal weather strip-
ping, which is designed to fit inside window channels
or frames. Gasket-type weather stripping can be used
in its place. Just follow the instructions in this chapter
for installing gasket-type weather stripping.


50 HOME REPAIRS
Flooring Fix-Ups.
Flooring Fix-Ups
Keeping up what’s underfoot helps the overall appearance of a
home and the lasting durability of your flooring.
Repairing Vinyl Flooring
Vinyl flooring is available in sheets and tiles. Chemical seam
sealers are available for some flooring materials; be sure you
purchase the correct kind for your flooring.
Filling Scratches and Dents
Scratches and dents in vinyl
flooring can be filled using a
paste made with shavings from
a scrap piece or extra tile.
Step 1—Scrape the surface
of the extra flooring piece
with a notched blade to make
a powder.
Safety First
• When repairing or replacing vinyl
or linoleum flooring, have an expert
check the existing materials to make
sure that they don’t contain asbestos.
• Keep your working area well-ventilated; adhesives, seal-
ers, and adhesive solvents may contain harmful fumes.
1


HOME REPAIRS 51
.Flooring Fix-Ups
Step 2—Mix the powder with
a clear, quick-drying varnish
or lacquer.
Step 3—Surround the scratch
or dent with masking tape to
protect the undamaged floor.
Step 4—Trowel the mixture into
the scratch with a putty knife
so that it is level with the floor
surface. Let it dry.
Step 5—Buff the surface with
fine steel wool and boiled
linseed oil.
2
4
5
3


52 HOME REPAIRS
Flooring Fix-Ups.
Flattening Curled Tiles
Vinyl tiles sometimes curl at
the edges, but you may be
able to iron them flat again.
First, cover the tiles with
paper towels and heat using
a warm—not hot—iron.
Heat often reactivates the
original adhesive. Once the
tiles are flattened, cover the
seams with foil or waxed
paper, and weight down the
tiles overnight.
If the tiles recurl, heat
them again with a warm iron and then gently lift the curled
edges and apply new adhesive. Press the tiles back into place
and apply seam sealer. Cover the seams with foil or waxed
paper and weight them down overnight.
Replacing Damaged Tiles
Replace damaged vinyl tiles square by square.
Step 1—Heat the damaged squares
with a hair dryer to loosen the
adhesive, and then lift them out
with a putty knife or chisel.
Be careful not to damage the edges
of the adjoining tiles.
1


HOME REPAIRS 53
.Flooring Fix-Ups
Step 2—Remove all old adhesive from the subflooring with
the putty knife or chisel.
Step 3—Place the new tile in the opening, matching the
pattern and trimming the new tile to fit.
2
3


54 HOME REPAIRS
Flooring Fix-Ups.
Step 4—Apply the recommended
adhesive to the floor. Warm the new
tile with an iron or blow dryer and
set it in place.
Step 5—Cover the new tile
with foil or waxed paper and
weight it down overnight.
4
5


HOME REPAIRS 55
.Flooring Fix-Ups
Patching Sheet Flooring
Here’s how to replace a worn spot in
sheet flooring:
Step 1—Cut a new piece of floor-
ing that is larger than the damaged
area. Match the pattern exactly and
tape the new flooring in place.
Step 2—Use a sharp knife
and carpenter’s square
to cut through both the
patch and the old flooring.
Remove the new patch and
the surrounding scraps.
1
2


56 HOME REPAIRS
Flooring Fix-Ups.
Step 3—Heat the old flooring with a hair
dryer to loosen the adhesive. Remove the
damaged area, working from the worn
area to the edges. Be careful not to dam-
age the edge of the patch area. Clean the
old adhesive from the subflooring.
Step 4—Check the fit of
the patch and trim it, if
necessary. Apply adhesive
to the subflooring and
insert the patch. If seam
sealer is available for that
type of flooring, apply it
to the edges.
3
4


HOME REPAIRS 57
.Flooring Fix-Ups
Repairing Concrete and Asphalt
You can follow this procedure to repair cracks and small holes in
concrete and asphalt.
Step 1—Clear the crack or hole of all large debris. Undercut the edges
with a chisel and heavy hammer.
Step 2—Flush out the remaining debris with water.
Step 3—Apply patching material with a trowel. If you are patching
concrete, the patch area must still be wet; if asphalt, the area must be
completely dry. Use the edge of the trowel to pack every crevice.
Step 5—Cover the patch
with foil or waxed
paper and weight it
down overnight.
5
321





HOME REPAIRS 59
.All About Windows
All About Windows
Routine maintenance of your windows will keep them looking
good inside and out and can also contribute toward keeping
them working well. Often, this can lead to increased energy
efficiency in your home—always an important goal.
Repairing Screens
Severely torn or damaged screens should
be replaced, but small holes or tears are
easy to repair. Repair kits are available at
hardware stores.
Cover small rips and holes in a metal
screen with a patch that is 2 inches larger
than the tear. First, press the damaged wires
of the tear against a flat surface. Bend the
wires on the edge of the patch into right
angles (use a block of wood to help you
make a straight, sharp bend). Center the
patch over the tear and push the bent wires
through the screening around the tear. Turn
the screen over and bend the wires flat
against the screen with a block of wood.
A window sash
is the movable
part of a window
that includes the
glass panes and
the framework
that holds those
panes. A double-
hung window
has two sashes.
Casement
windows have
a hinge on the
side and swing
like a door.
Safety First
• Make sure that a raised lower
window sash is secured when
repairing a window.
• Always wear thick work gloves and
eye protection when holding glass panes
during window-repairing activities.


60 HOME REPAIRS
All About Windows.
For extra strength,
work these wires into
the screen again, weav-
ing them back and
forth as many times as
you can. Your patch
will be noticeable at
first, but the new wire
will weather with time.
For a fiberglass
screen, cut a patch that
is 1
⁄2 to 1 inch larger
than the tear. Using
nylon thread, sew the
patch onto the screen-
ing. Or you can apply
a thin line of epoxy
glue around the edges
of the patch, smooth
it, and then blot any
excess before it dries.
Replacing Glass Panes
Many homeowners’ insurance policies include a provision
that pays for a professional to replace broken windows. Before
repairing a window yourself, check whether your homeowner’s
policy has this provision. If not, you can try replacing small
panes yourself. But be careful! Be sure to wear thick work
gloves and eye protection
when working with broken
glass. Also, don’t break glass
that is merely cracked; you
might damage the frame.
Glazing is
the process or
trade of fitting
windows with
glass. A glazier
is the person
who cuts and
sets the glass.
BROKEN GLASS
GLAZING COMPOUND
GLAZIER’S
POINT


HOME REPAIRS 61
.All About Windows
Wood-Framed Windows
Step 1—Remove old glazing compound from the frame. Make this
task easier by letting linseed oil soak into the compound for about 30
minutes. Then remove the glazier’s points (small, flat, triangular metal
pieces). Finally, remove the broken glass.
Step 2—Clean the frame, removing all paint and compound. Sand the
wood, then add a light coat of linseed oil to help prevent the new
compound from becoming brittle.
Step 3—Measure the frame; subtract 1⁄16 inch on each side to allow for
wood expansion. Have the replacement glass cut to size, or carefully
cut it yourself.
Step 4—Apply a thin bed of glazing compound to the frame’s outside
edge, then place the glass on this cushion. Install glazier’s points
every 4 to 5 inches.
Step 5—Lay strips of glazing compound around the frame; smooth it
with a putty knife into a 45-degree bevel. Let it dry five to seven days
before painting.


62 HOME REPAIRS
All About Windows.
Making a Straight Cut on Glass
Before you try to cut
a window pane, prac-
tice first on a piece of
scrap glass so that you
can get a feel for how
much pressure you
need to use to score
the glass. If you hear a
rasping sound as you
move the glass cutter
across the glass, your
pressure is just right.
Step 1—Score the glass
first with a glass cutter.
Lay the glass on a pad-
ded surface and place
a straightedge against
the cut line. Run the
cutter against the
glass only once, pull-
ing toward you in one
smooth motion.
Step 2—Deepen
the score by
tapping against
the underside
of the score
line with the ball
at the end of the
glass cutter.


HOME REPAIRS 63
.All About Windows
Metal-Framed Windows
Glass can be held in metal sashes in three ways: with flexible
spring clips that keep the glass in place (instead of glazier’s
points), with four plastic moldings that snap into channels
in the frame (common with insulated glass), or with rubber
gaskets. Talk with a professional or do some research about
the kind of sash you have and the best way to remove and
replace the glass.
Some metal windows come apart so that you can remove
the gaskets and the glass. If rubber gaskets are worn and
cracked, buy new ones. Also, make sure you use a glazing
compound that is especially formulated for steel or aluminum
window sashes.
Step 3—Place a thin
dowel that is as long
as the score line on the
work surface, and place
the score line directly
over it. Press firmly on
both sides of the score,
and the glass should
snap with a clean,
straight edge.


64 HOME REPAIRS
All About Windows.
Installing Rods for Curtains or Drapes
There are lots of different kinds of window treatments—
including basic curtains and drapery rods. When installing
rods, keep these things in mind:
• Keep rods perfectly level, even when the window isn’t.
• Usually, you shouldn’t be able to see rods from the outside.
• Bracket placement affects the look of a window, making it
appear taller or wider, or both. Decide whether to allow wall
space or window area to accommodate the drapes when
they are open.
• When determining the height of a rod for full-length drapes,
notice where the hooks are placed in the drape. Allow 1
⁄2 to
1 inch at the bottom so the drapes will not touch the floor
or carpeting, even after hanging for a while.
• Once you find the best place for the rod, hammer a small
nail lightly into the frame or wall where the top of the
bracket will be. Place a yardstick, a long thick dowel, or a
metal ruler across the top of the nails. Check the placement
with a carpenter’s level.
Replacing Blind Cords
It doesn’t cost much to replace broken or frayed cords in
window blinds. Take the blind from the window and place
it on a floor, table, or workbench. Pull tacks, clips, or staples
from the top mechanism that holds the pulleys. Blinds will
differ in the way they are made, so carefully sketch the cord
path before removing the existing cords. When you are sure
that you understand how the blind works, remove the old
cords and thread the new ones through.
For easier threading, attach the new cord to one end of
the existing cord with a small knot and cover it with tape. Pull
the old cord until the new one is in place.
Repairing or Replacing Window Sash Cords
Many older wooden windows have a pulley system for opening
and closing. Here’s how to install a new cord in such windows.
Note, however, that experts suggest replacing sash cords with
sash chains if the window has a metal pulley with a groove
large enough to accommodate the chain.


HOME REPAIRS 65
.All About Windows
Step 1—Raise the lower
sash of the window. With
a wide, thick pry bar, pry
out the stop strip on both
sides of the window and
lift the lower sash out of
the window frame.
Step 2—Remove the
cover to the weight pocket
by unscrewing its screws.
If necessary, pry off the
cover with a chisel. Take
the weight out of the
weight pocket and remove
the old cord.
Step 3—Add about a
foot to the total length
of the old cord and cut
a new cord (or chain)
to this length.
Step 4—Push the new
cord over the pulley
and connect it to the sash. If the cord sticks, tie a small fish-
ing sinker to a string, attach it to the cord, and then drop the
sinker over the pulley.
Step 5—Remove the sinker and attach the end of the cord
to the sash weight. If you are replacing the cord with a chain,
loop the chain through the hole in the weight and bind it
tightly with wire. Put the weight into the weight pocket.
Step 6—Replace the pocket cover, then place the sash in the
sill. Pull the weight as high as it will go. Cut the cord or chain
4 inches below the hole in the edge of the sash.
Step 7—Tie an overhand knot in the cut end of the cord,
fit the knot into the hole in the edge of the sash, and release
the slack. The cord will lie in the channel of the sash. If you
have used a chain, secure it in the slot with two 3
⁄4-inch wood
screws fastened through separate links of the chain.
Step 8—Replace the sash in the window frame and nail the
stops back on.
SASH
CORDS
SASH
WEIGHTS
PULLEYS
UPPER
SASH
LOWER
SASH
STOP
STRIP





HOME REPAIRS 67
.Home Furnishings How-Tos
Home Furnishings
How-Tos
Furniture and decorative objects give your home its unique
personality. Should one of these items break, don’t trash it—
repair it.
Reinforcing Picture Frames
If pictures are hung improperly, particularly heavy ones, the
joints of the frame may pull apart. It’s a good idea to reinforce
joints before hanging to prevent future problems.
One way to reinforce frames is by using a metal frame-
mending plate, which you can buy at hardware stores. Drill
holes first before securing the plate with screws, making sure
that the screws aren’t so long that they come through to the
front of the frame.
Safety First
• When spray painting, work in a well-ventilated area
and wear a paper mask to avoid breathing paint fumes.
• Certain kinds of solder release fumes that can be
harmful to your eyes and lungs; therefore, always work with solder in
a well-ventilated area.
• Be careful not to let hot solder splash around because it will burn you
almost instantly.
• Wear safety goggles when soldering.
• Before you start soldering, protect any flammable material with a
fireproof shield or wet rags, and have a fire extinguisher nearby.
• If possible, use a soldering iron stand or clamps when you are
soldering, leaving one hand free to hold the solder.
• Never leave a soldering iron on unattended.


68 HOME REPAIRS
Home Furnishings How-Tos.
To reinforce a small frame, use a finishing nail.
Drill a hole for the nail (a pilot hole) and then drive
the nail through the joint. Countersink the nail
head and fill with surfacing compound. Or, heat a
crayon that is close in color to the wood and apply
it over the nail head; you can scrape off the excess
crayon with a fingernail.
For a very large frame, use a 1
⁄8-inch dowel
rather than a finishing nail. Drill a hole that is a
little bit deeper than the dowel (for the glue). Coat
the dowel with glue, hammer it into the hole, and
cut the end flush with the surface of the frame.
Corrugated or chevron fasteners are useful for
strengthening miter joints in a picture frame. Seal
the edges with wood glue, and then hammer the
sharp end gently across the joint. A small angle
iron may also strengthen the joint.
Mending Pottery, Glass, and China
You can mend items made of pottery, glass, or china
with quick-drying cements specially made for these
materials. Each piece must be clean and dry. Fit
the pieces together like a puzzle before cementing
so that you know where each belongs and in what order they
should be placed together. Apply cement according to the
package directions, holding pieces together with rubber bands
or masking tape for the entire drying period. Or, you can easily
make a positioning box by filling a shallow box three-quarters
full with uncooked rice or beans. When you place the item in
the box, it will stay upright and balanced while the glue sets.
Let the glue set for 24 hours. If the item is in
several pieces, you may want to do only a portion
at a time, letting each set thoroughly before
continuing to glue.


HOME REPAIRS 69
.Home Furnishings How-Tos
Soldering
Solder is a mixture of tin and lead (usually 60 percent tin and
40 percent lead) used to join together wires or other metals
such as tin, copper, brass, or iron. Soldering is used in some
plumbing jobs and can be used for minor repairs of kitchen
items such as reattaching a handle to a colander.
Ribbon or wire solder with a rosin core is the most
common type of solder. The rosin core in the center of this
solder eliminates the need for a separate application of flux,
which is a paste that removes tarnish from metal and helps
make soldered joints stronger.
A 25- to 50-watt soldering pen is a good tool for the kinds
of fine wires found in small appliances; soldering guns or irons
with higher wattage are useful for larger soldering projects.
Using the soldering gun for repairs is easy:
Step 1—Lightly scrape wires and metals to be soldered so that
they are clean.
Step 2—Paint the area to be soldered with flux. Flux varies
depending on the metal to be soldered. Make sure you use
the right one. Acid fluxes corrode copper wires and must be
washed away after soldering.
Step 3—Heat the soldering tool and apply it to the solder
point. Feed the solder to the area from the top, letting it melt
down over the joint.
Keep your
soldering tool
tinned, or coated
with solder, at all
times, to improve
heat transfer and
keep the tip of the
tool in good
working condition.


70 HOME REPAIRS
Home Furnishings How-Tos.
You will find
many products
for filling holes
in wood: wood
dough, wood filler,
water putty, and
stick shellac, for
instance. Read the
label to find out
which will work
best for the kind
of hole you
are filling.
Repairing Furniture
Wobbly legs, loose rungs, splits, or warps detract from the
appearance of wood furniture—and in time can lead to its
ruin. Most of the time, minor repairs can solve the problem
and the piece will be as good as new.
Uneven Chair Legs
Place the chair on an even surface and note the airspace under
the short leg. Even out this space by attaching a small metal
glider to the shorter leg, or tack a small chip of wood to it.
Remove the tack and wood-glue the chip in place. Before leav-
ing the chair to dry, place a piece of foil or waxed paper under
the leg in case of excess glue.
Filling Holes in Wood
If you are using wood dough or putty to fill a cavity, apply it
so that it is slightly higher than the furniture surface. Let the
filler dry thoroughly. It may shrink as it dries, so you may have
to add another layer. Once it is dry and hard, sand the surface
smooth, and then paint or stain and varnish the patch to match
the surrounding color.
Repairing a Split in Wood
Fill splits with wood glue and then clamp with a vise, strong
wire, or masking tape until dry. Protect the wood surface from
scratches by padding the area with cardboard.
Basics of Sanding
Always sand with the grain
of the wood when you are
sanding by hand. If you don’t,
you’ll leave scratches. Sand
with an even pressure. For
easier sanding, make a sand-
ing block out of a block of
wood that measures 3 or
6 x 3¼ x 1 inches. Pad the top
and the bottom with cork or
felt to protect the work. Wrap sandpaper around the
block and hold it against the sides as you work.
WOOD
BLOCK
CORK OR
FELT PADDING
SANDPAPER


HOME REPAIRS 71
.Home Furnishings How-Tos
Loose Rungs
Remove the loose rung from its hole.
Using sandpaper, steel wool, or a round
file, clean the old glue out of the hole
and from the tenon (the protruding piece
of wood that fits into the hole). Coat the
tenon with wood glue and wrap it with
enough fine, strong thread so that it will
fit tightly in the hole. Apply more glue to
the thread and reinsert the rung into the
hole. Clamp the joint until the glue dries.
Loose Joints
Simply tightening joint screws often solves
the problem of loose joints. Sometimes,
however, you may need to add filler first
in order to tighten a screw sufficiently.
You also can strengthen a chair with
an angle iron, or a strategically placed
wood block glued and nailed to the chair
back. Be sure the nail doesn’t puncture
the finished surface.
Water Rings and Fine Scratches
You can usually remove a water ring on wood furniture by
rubbing it with toothpaste or another gentle abrasive cleaner.
Buffing with very fine steel wool and furniture oil may remove
surface scratches. When you are finished, clean the area thor-
oughly with a soft, dry cloth.
Veneer Bubbles and Dents
Veneer is a very thin layer of fine hardwood that is glued over
a plywood or solid wood base. Sometimes the veneer bubbles
up or dents down. A hot iron and a washcloth may be all you
need to restore the surface, as you will soften the glue and
then allow it to reharden. Use a dry iron and dry cloth on a
bubble, and a steam iron and damp cloth on a dent. In both
cases, be careful not to hold the iron down too long—just 5-
or 10-second cycles, checking for scorching—so that you don’t
damage the finish. Cover the heated area with waxed paper
and weight it down until the glue rehardens.


72 HOME REPAIRS
Home Furnishings How-Tos.
Don’t skimp on a
paintbrush. A good
brush makes a
world of difference
when working with
enamel. Be sure to
choose the proper
bristle for the paint
you are using.
Generally, alkyd-
and oil-based
paints require
natural-bristle
brushes, whereas
synthetic-bristle
brushes are fine
for latex paint.
Painting, Staining, and Varnishing Wood
Restoring a piece of furniture to like-new condition, or repaint-
ing a major piece of house trim, such as a door, can give you
a lot of satisfaction. When painting, choose enamel for wood-
work because it’s easier to keep clean. Enamel comes in latex
or alkyd-based paint with either a high gloss or satin finish.
For durability, buy the best paint you can afford.
Preparation
Painting and staining projects begin with similar preparation.
Both also require careful attention to detail for the best results.
Step 1—Remove any hardware and clean the surface of all dirt
and grime with household cleaner.
Step 2—Strip the old finish, if necessary. Use a commercial
stripper and follow the manufacturer’s directions. Read the label.
Step 3—Fill cracks and make any needed repairs.
Step 4—Lightly sand the entire object. Clean it with a soft,
dry cloth to remove all the dust caused by sanding.
Painting and Varnishing
Step 1—Stir the paint thoroughly. If the paint has been used
already, you may need to strain out any impurities with
cheesecloth or an old nylon stocking.
Step 2—Lay down the first coat of enamel with long, full
strokes. Smooth out runs before they set.
Step 3—When the surface is covered, go over the coat cross-
wise with the tip of the brush to smooth out the brush strokes.
Step 4—Allow the paint to dry thoroughly. Drying time
depends on temperature and humidity.
Step 5—Resand with steel wool and wipe the
piece of furniture clean. Apply a second coat in
the same manner.
Spray Painting
Spray small objects in a cardboard box to contain
excess spray. Spray larger objects outside or in a
garage or basement. Protect floors and walls with
a large spread of newspapers or drop cloths.


HOME REPAIRS 73
.Home Furnishings How-Tos
Make the first coat of spray paint very light and barely
noticeable. The second coat can be a bit heavier. Let the paint
dry thoroughly between coats.
Staining
Staining changes the color of wood and enhances the natural
wood grain. There are two basic types of stains: penetrating
and pigmented. Each has its advantages and disadvantages.
Gel stains combine some of the best qualities of both stain
types and are easy to apply.
Here are some hints for successful staining:
• End grains soak up stain more than the rest of the wood,
so seal ends with shellac before staining. After drying, sand
off any shellac that has lapped onto other areas.
• Apply stain with a chisel-end brush, foam pad, or lint-free
cotton cloth (such as cheesecloth).
• Wipe off excess stain with a clean cloth.
• A second coat will darken the stain.
You can finish a stained piece with a polyurethane or
varnish coating. Polyurethane is clear; varnish has some tint
and may affect the stain color. Apply varnish with the wood
grain. Smooth out runs before they set. Sand the piece with
steel wool and wipe off the dust between coats.
Care and Storage of Equipment
Clean your brushes after each use. Cleaning takes only a
few minutes and will help brushes last a long time. Allowing
paint to harden in a brush makes cleaning difficult and
time-consuming. If the same brush and paint have been used
over several days, store the brush overnight (with most of the
paint wiped off) in tightly folded aluminum foil or wet paper.
Clean brushes that have been used in oil-based paint with
a solvent-based cleaner such as mineral spirits. (Follow the
solvent cleaning by washing in warm sudsy water and rinsing.)
With water-based paint, clean the equipment with soap and
water, then rinse. Carefully smooth down the bristles and wrap
the brush in its original packaging or heavy paper.
Remove roller covers from the frame. Clean them with the
appropriate solvent or soap and water; rinse well. Clean up
around the painted area. After the paint has dried on the drop
cloth, shake off any debris, then fold or roll it up neatly. Sweep
up any debris and properly dispose of it.
The most impor-
tant part of taking
care of any paint
application tool
or equipment
is cleaning it
immediately after
painting. Failure
to do so can cost
you more time and
more money
spent on special
cleaners, which in
some cases may
ruin the tool.


74 HOME REPAIRS
Doors and More.
Doors and More
Making the outside of your home sound, safe, and attractive is
just as important as keeping up the inside.
Safety First
Get help from another person when lifting a heavy door or
gate off its hinges during a repair job.
Repairing Sagging Doors and Gates
A loose hinge is often responsible for a sagging door. If that’s
the problem in your home, brace the door with a wedge and
tighten the screws. If the holes are too large and have been
stripped, fill the cavity with wood plugs—a wooden golf tee
dipped in wood glue works well. Drive it into the hole with a
hammer as far as it will go.
After the glue dries, cut the tee or plug off so that it is
level with the surface of the hinge. Then you can reset the
screw into the new material. This method works just as well
with outside gates. If tightening the screws isn’t sufficient,
add extra nails.


HOME REPAIRS 75
.Doors and More
Sometimes the
weight of a gate makes
it sag. Installing a sag
rod (also called a tension
support) or wire-and-
turnbuckle arrangement
will correct this problem.
Support the gate in the
proper position with a
piece of wood before
attaching the hardware.
To attach the wire, rod, or
cable, use bolts or install
eye hooks at the top of
the hinged side and the bottom of the opposite side. Tighten
the turnbuckle to adjust the tension on the cable and pull the
gate into position. The sag rod needs to be installed on the
hinge side of the gate. (You can also use a wire-and-turnbuckle
to help with a sagging door.)
Repairing Stairs
A loose step is dangerous, and often all
it takes to fix it is a well-placed nail. If
the step is rotted or split, however, you
must replace it. Cut a new one of the
same length and nail it to the cleat. If
the cleat is rotten or broken, replace it
first. Bolt cleats to the side of the stair,
called the stringer.
CONCRETE
COARSE
GRAVEL
FENCE POSTTURNBUCKLE
CLEAT
STRINGER


76 HOME REPAIRS
Doors and More.
Repairing Railings
Loose railings are a serious
hazard, but before repairs
begin you must figure out
the root of the wobble. If the
rail is pulling away from the
newel post, follow the steps
below. If the newel posts are
loose, it is best to consult
a professional.
Step 1—Drill a pilot hole at
an angle through the newel
post into the loose handrail.
(See views 1a and 1b.)
Step 2—Work wood glue
into the joint between the
post and railing.
Step 3—Countersink a wood screw into the pilot hole
and tighten.
Another option is to work from the opposite direction.
Drill pilot holes at an angle through the sides of the railing into
the newel post, apply wood glue to the joint, then nail the
railing firmly to the post. (See view 4.)
If the whole railing is loose, reinforce it by attaching
blocking under the rail between each newel post. Cut the
blocks to fit snugly between each pair of posts, then glue and
nail them into place. (See views 5 and 6.) For a more polished
look, you will want to paint the block.
1a 1b
2 3
COUNTERSINK BIT COUNTERSINK HOLE
4 5 6


HOME REPAIRS 77
.Doors and More
Repairing Fences
People in different parts of the country prefer different kinds
of fences. Among the most common types are picket, board,
rail, and chain-link fences. Each has its own advantages.
Construction and repair of these fences are also unique,
although there are some common procedures.
Fence posts usually are set in large holes with concrete.
Several handfuls of coarse gravel at the bottom of the hole
promote drainage and deter wood rot.
The fence rails usually are horizontal pieces of wood or
metal to which the infill is attached. The infill can be any one
of several varieties of pickets, boards, or metal fencing placed
perpendicularly to the rails and/or posts.
Renailing pickets or boards is a common fence repair.
Another is replacing an entire picket or board if it is damaged.
If you have a loose fence post, you can bolster it with a fence
iron. Butt the fence iron next to
the post, placing the side of the
fence iron that has nail holes
against the post. Hammer
the iron into the ground and
then attach the iron to the post
with nails.
Sag rods (also known as tension supports) are
optional for the wood gates described here, but
they are easy to install and add stability to the
gate posts. They are rods or cables with bolts
to secure them to the posts. They should be
installed near the top of the gate post and run
down to nearly the bottom of the closest fence
post in the same section. Use the turnbuckles
in the rod to adjust the rod or cable tension to
keep the gate post steady. The sag rod need
only be installed on the hinge side of the gate.
Sag rods can be bought in most hardware
stores and building supply stores.
FENCE IRON
NAIL HOLES


78 HOME REPAIRS
Home Repairs Resources.
Scouting Literature
Electricity, Electronics, Fire Safety,
Painting, Plumbing, Welding, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Editors of Better Homes and Gardens.
Big Book of Home How-To. Better
Homes and Gardens, 2006.
Cassell, Julian, Peter Parham, and
Theresa Coleman. Do It Yourself
Home Improvement: Step-by-Step
Guide to Home Improvement. DK
Adult, 2006.
Editors of Creative Homeowner.
Ultimate Guide: Home Repair &
Improvement, 3rd ed. Creative
Homeowner, 2011.
Editors of Creative Publishing. Black &
Decker: The Complete Photo Guide
to Home Repair. Creative Publishing
International, 2008.
Editors of Family Handyman. Family
Handyman Home Improvement
2013. Family Handyman, 2013.
———. Reader’s Digest Complete
Do-It-Yourself Manual, revised ed.
Reader’s Digest, 2005.
Editors of Reader’s Digest. Family
Handyman Trade Secrets: Fix
Your Home Like a Pro!
Reader’s Digest, 2012.
———. Family Handyman Whole House
Repair Guide: Over 300 Step-by-Step
Repairs! Reader’s Digest, 2013.
———. Fix, Repair & Replace: Upgrade
Your Home Like a Pro. Reader’s
Digest, 2011.
———. New Fix-It-Yourself Manual.
Reader’s Digest, 2009.
———. 1001 Do-It-Yourself Hints and
Tips: Tricks, Shortcuts, How-Tos, and
Other Great Ideas for Inside, Outside,
and All Around Your House.
Reader’s Digest, 2008.
———. Reader’s Digest Complete
Do-It-Yourself Manual, revised ed.
Reader’s Digest, 2005.
Flexner, Bob. Wood Finishing 101:
The Step-by-Step Guide. Popular
Woodworking Books, 2011.
Home Repairs Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


HOME REPAIRS 79
.Home Repairs Resources
The Home Depot. Home Improvement
1-2-3, 3rd ed. The Home
Depot, 2008.
Jackson, Albert, and David Day. Popular
Mechanics Complete Home How-To.
Hearst, 2009.
Kidd, James. Popular Mechanics 75 Tools
Every Man Needs: And How to Use
Them Like a Pro. Hearst, 2011.
Manfredini, Lou. Lou Manfredini’s
House Smarts. Ballantine
Books, 2004.
Nagyszalanczy, Sandor. The
Homeowner’s Ultimate Tool Guide.
Taunton Press, 2003.
Petersen, C.J. Popular Mechanics When
Duct Tape Just Isn’t Enough: Quick
Fixes for Everyday Disasters.
Hearst, 2013.
Ramsey, Dan. The Home Owner’s
Manual: Operating Instructions,
Troubleshooting Tips, and Advice on
System Maintenance.
Quirk Books, 2006.
Wing, Charlie. How Your House Works:
A Visual Guide to Understanding and
Maintaining Your Home, Updated
and Expanded, 2nd ed.
RSMeans, 2012.
Organizations and Websites
Ask the Builder
www.askthebuilder.com
Environmental Protection Agency
1200 Pennsylvania Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20460
Telephone: 202-272-0167
www.epa.gov/asbestos
www.epa.gov/lead
Family Handyman
2915 Commers Drive, No. 700
Eagan, MN 55121
Toll-free telephone: 800-374-3515
www.familyhandyman.com
This Old House Online
135 W. 50th St., 10th Floor
New York, NY 10020
Telephone: 212-522-9465
www.thisoldhouse.com/toh/
Toiletology 101
www.toiletology.com
Underwriters Laboratories Inc.
333 Pfingsten Road
Northbrook, IL 60062-2096
Telephone: 847-272-8800
www.ul.com


80 HOME REPAIRS
Home Repairs Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Creative
Homeowner Press and the late Al
Carrell, whose column, “The Super
Handyman,” ran in newspapers for
almost 50 years, for permitting
the use of copyrighted material and
additional materials for the original
merit badge pamphlet. Thanks also
to William and Liz Augustine of the
American Association of Home Repair
Clubs for their assistance in the revision
of this pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
All photos and illustrations are the
property of or are protected by Scouting
America.
Dan Bryant—pages 42 (hand tools)
and 43
Daniel Giles—pages 6, 25, 28, 35, 38,
58, 60 (workers), 68 (positioning
box), and 75 (repairing stairs)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 12–19, 23, 26–27, 31–34, 37,
39, 42, 57, 59–61, 65, 68, 70–72,
and 74–77
Roger Morgan—page 66
Randy Piland—page 45
(painting exterior)
Permission to use the UL name
and trademark has been granted by
Underwriters Laboratories Inc.