ARCHITECTURE
AND LANDSCAPE
ARCHITECTURE
STEM-Based


ARCHITECTURE
AND LANDSCAPE
ARCHITECTURE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35857
ISBN 978-0-8395-3304-7
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
Architecture
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Architecture or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 3
Thorncrown Chapel near Eureka
Springs, Arkansas; Fay Jones +
Maurice Jennings Architects
Pine Eagle Chapel at Camp Tiak Scout Camp, near Wiggins, Mississippi, makes an
impressive backdrop for outdoor gatherings; Fay Jones + Maurice Jennings Architects.


4 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 5
Architecture Contents
Introduction to Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
History of Architecture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
How Architecture Happens . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Education and Career Opportunities in Architecture . . . . . . . 35
How to Learn More About Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Glossary of Architectural Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Architecture Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
Sydney Opera House; Jorn Utzon, design architect


Taj Mahal, Agra, India; Ustad Ahmad Lahauri, architect


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 7
.Introduction to Architecture
Introduction to
Architecture
Defined simply, architecture is the structure that shapes space. It
includes the elements that form space around buildings as well
as space inside buildings. We constantly experience architecture
as we go about our daily lives, and we are influenced deeply by
what we see, hear, and feel.
Architecture is not just the special buildings like cathedrals,
museums, or sports stadiums we read about or see on television;
it is as normal as the homes, places of worship, schools, and
shopping malls where we live, worship, work, learn, and play
every day. However, architecture is more than just common
shelter; building has always satisfied the human need to create
something of meaning. Even the simplest form of architecture
is a work of art that requires thought and planning.
In a way, all
architecture is
sculpture in
which people live
their lives. Each
of us creates
architecture
when we build
a clubhouse,
decorate a
bedroom, or even
stretch blankets
over dining room
chairs to fashion
a hideout.


8 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Introduction to Architecture.
Architecture is dynamic and changes with the styles, colors,
and building materials that vary from time to time, region to
region, and nation to nation according to the different needs,
different resources, and different ways that people see and do
things. From cave dwellers to astronauts, all humans have
influenced, and been influenced by, architecture.
Architects are problem solvers who have studied human
nature, art, and science, and who understand how to create
architecture that people need. Some architects still draw designs
by hand and work directly with clients to design buildings
or other “systems” that solve problems. Other architects use
advanced computer technology and work in teams with other
designers, such as engineers, to design very complicated projects
that might be buildings or other systems that solve problems.
Whatever their
work style, all
architects must
combine their
knowledge of art
and engineering
to create useful
places for people
to live and work.
Liberty Science Center, Jersey City, New Jersey; The Hillier Group, architect


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 9
.Introduction to Architecture
Architecture is an exciting profession that can offer you
a real chance to create something of meaning, whether it is a
big project or a modest one. Many people with an education
in architecture find challenging career opportunities in other
fields that require artistic talent and the ability to evaluate and
solve problems, such as filmmaking, acting, environmental
science, education, law, governmental service, business systems,
construction management, and many others.
Architects enjoy many opportunities and face many chal-
lenges. They must continue their education to help keep their
awareness keen and their expectations high. Like the buildings
that architects design, the responsibilities and rewards of the
architectural profession come in all shapes and sizes. Earning
the Architecture merit badge will give you a new perspective
of architecture and a chance to see what architects do.
Dancing House, Prague, Czech Republic; Vlado Milunic’ and Frank Gehry, architects


Kaufmann House (called “Fallingwater”), Bear Run, Pennsylvania, 1936–37;
Frank Lloyd Wright, architect (after Norwich)
The Parthenon, a temple on the Acropolis, Athens, Greece
(after Fletcher)


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 11
.History of Architecture
History of Architecture
The well-known modern architect Le Corbusier said that
architecture is experienced by “the foot that walks, the head
that turns, the eye that sees.” Architecture appeals to and involves
all of the senses. To understand the importance of architecture
as the setting for our lives, we need to know something of
architecture’s history and development. Let’s look briefly at
architecture through the ages.
Prehistoric Architecture
Architecture had simple beginnings. People first sought shelter
in caves. Then, they learned to construct simple huts of reeds
and to build structures of timber and stone. This is architecture
as shelter.
As people began to live together in large groups, and once
they had solved the basic problem of shelter,
another kind of architecture was developed,
that of ritual and ceremony.
Two important aspects of architecture
can be seen in one famous prehistoric site,
Stonehenge. One aspect is function. Function
is the way a building or structure does its
job—the way it accommodates the uses for
which it was built. Stonehenge may have
functioned as a unique type of calendar,
plotting annual alignments of the sun
and moon. The second aspect is ritual.
Stonehenge is thought to have been an
outdoor temple that had sacred and
religious meaning.
Stonehenge on Salisbury Plain, Wiltshire,
England (from World Architecture)


12 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Cliff Palace, Mesa Verde,
Colorado (R. B. Ferrier)
Native American
Architecture
Architecture designed by the
ancient cultures of North America
is among the most significant
found anywhere in the world.
In the Southwest during ancient
times, Anasazi Indians developed
a sophisticated culture and an
architecture of great complexity
and excellent construction. The
largest and best-preserved ruins
are those of Pueblo Bonito, a
five-story building that was
constructed in the 10th century.Adobe dwelling, Taos,
New Mexico
Pueblo Bonito, Chaco Canyon,
New Mexico (R. B. Ferrier)


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 13
.History of Architecture
Ancient Egyptian Architecture
The people of ancient Egypt developed a complex society that
was reflected in their architecture. They built great pyramids to
preserve the bodies and possessions of their kings, who were
called pharaohs. The Egyptians designed and built religious tem-
ples and the pyramids to resist the erosion that would occur over
time. The aspects of function and ritual were important in the
architecture of ancient Egypt.
Pyramid complex, Giza, Egypt, 2570–2500 b.c. (after Kostof)
Great Temple of Abu Simbel, Egypt, circa 1301 b.c. (after Fletcher)


14 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
History of Architecture.
Greek Architecture
Many people believe that the most significant building site in
the history of architecture is the Acropolis at Athens, Greece.
The basic elements of classical architecture are preserved in the
ruins of the Acropolis, which was erected in the fifth century b.c.
(Classical refers to the forms and styles of ancient Greece and Rome.)
The Acropolis was dedicated mostly to the celebration of
ritual, but it also had functional areas, including markets where
goods were bought and sold, and theaters for entertainment.
The term tripartite refers to the three parts of a building or
column. The classic column has
a base, a shaft, and a capital (a
decorative upper end). The classic
temple has a base, a colonnade
(columns set in a row), and a
pediment (a triangle-shaped upper
structure). This is similar to the
human form, which consists of
the feet, the torso, and the head.
The Greeks’ rudimentary
building practices limited the
height and width of their archi-
tecture to the size of stones that
could be moved and lifted into
place and the distance the stones
could span.
The Acropolis, Athens, Greece (after Norwich)
The Erechtheum, a temple on the Acropolis,
Athens, Greece (after Fletcher)


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 15
.History of Architecture
Roman Architecture
The architecture of the early Roman Empire was directly influenced
by the classical elements of Greek architecture. The Romans refined
these classic components. They developed the use of the arch, vault,
and dome.
An arch is a curved structure spanning an opening. It allowed
Roman architecture to incorporate wider spans. These buildings’
columns were farther apart, and their interiors were more
spacious and open. A vault is an arch-shaped structure used
as the ceiling of a room or other enclosed space; a dome is a
rounded vault. The use of vaults and domes created large open
spaces such as those at the Pantheon. The use of the arch and
vault introduced curved forms, and the Romans were the first
to include these elements on a massive scale in their architecture.
These classical architectural basics have continued to evolve
and can be seen in modern buildings.
Arch of Titus, Rome, Italy, a.d. 82 (from World Architecture)


16 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
History of Architecture.
The major monuments of Roman
architecture also show the importance of
function and ritual. The Roman Forum—
a large, open space in the central part of
the city where people gathered—featured
functional parts such as shops, markets,
theaters, and buildings for conducting
legal and political business. Monuments,
statues, and the temples of the Forum
fulfilled the purposes of religion and ritual.
Gothic Architecture
As the great cities in Italy, France, Spain,
Germany, and England flourished, an
elaborate new form of architecture
emerged in the 12th century. Called the
Gothic style, it was the dominant structural
style in Europe for 400 years. Ornate build-
ings reached toward the sky, their intricate
stone construction emphasizing soaring
spaces and allowing larger areas of glass.
Cathedral of Notre Dame,
Paris, France; front view
The Pantheon, Rome, Italy, interior
view (after Fletcher)
The Pantheon, Rome, Italy, exterior view
(after Fletcher)


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 17
.History of Architecture
Gothic architecture also introduced the
innovative use of “flying buttresses” that
supported high walls. Gothic buildings
designed with these buttresses feature
high-ceilinged, light-filled spaces.
Renaissance Architecture
The term renaissance means rebirth or
revival. In history, the Renaissance was
a period from the 14th century to the
17th century in Europe, when great
cultural and social advances were made.
Renaissance architects studied classical
Roman and Greek architecture. They used
the ideas of balance, proportion, and order
to develop a new architecture based on the
principles of the classical era. Important
accomplishments in art and architecture
were achieved during the Renaissance.
Dome of St. Peter’s Basilica,
Rome, Italy, 1546–1626;
Michelangelo, architect
(from World Architecture)


18 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
History of Architecture.
Modern Architecture
The Industrial Revolution, which began in
England about 1760, shaped the modern
world in which we live. Many people moved
from rural areas, leaving their farms to work
in factories making mass-produced products.
The structure of society changed significantly,
and architecture responded with dramatic
innovations. By the late 19th century, buildings
of concrete, iron, steel, and glass had become
the dominant architectural forms. When steel
was introduced, modern structures could be
built much taller and narrower than was pre-
viously possible, and many architects worked
to perfect the art of the sleek skyscraper.
In the first half of the 20th century,
three architects emerged as leaders of
modern architecture: the American Frank
Lloyd Wright, the Swiss-French Le Corbusier,
and the German-American Ludwig Mies
van der Rohe. Study any modern city, and you
will see the impact of modern architecture.
Robie House, Chicago, Illinois, 1908; Frank Lloyd Wright, architect (after Constantino)
La Tour IBM–Marathon Tower,
Montreal, Canada; Kohn Pederson
Fox Associates, architect


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 19
.History of Architecture
Architecture After
the Modern Era
By the end of the
20th century, computers and
the other technological advances
of the information age had signaled
other changes in the structure of society. Architecture
responded in a unique way. Rather than one new
movement, architects pursued a variety of directions.
For example, Richard Meier’s buildings continue to use
the highly ordered, all-white minimalist geometric
shapes of modern architecture, while Michael Graves
designed buildings that use classical elements and
descriptive images. Other architects are designing
buildings that appear to be incomplete, or in a state of
collision and conflict.
Smith House, Darien,
Connecticut, 1965–67;
Richard Meier, architect
Goat House, the Rural Studio, Sawyerville, Alabama; Samuel
Mockbee and Auburn University architecture students, architects
Humana Building,
Louisville, Kentucky;
Michael Graves,
architect


20 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
History of Architecture.
If you look carefully at the buildings in your community,
you will be able to see architectural features from various
periods of history. For requirement 1, you are to identify
buildings that can be associated with a specific historical
period. Look at the shapes of windows, doors, columns,
and roofs, and the different ways in which building materials
are used. Look at homes, places of worship, your city hall,
or perhaps an older school or college building to discover
how architects learn from the buildings of the distant—
or recent—past.
Guggenheim Bilbao Museum, Bilbao, Spain; Frank Gehry, architect
School of Architecture, Prairie View A&M University, Prairie View,
Texas; RoTo Architects with HKS
Architect Frank
Gehry uses
computer programs
linked directly to
the manufacturing
process to create
many of his
signature buildings,
such as the
Guggenheim
Bilbao Museum.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 21
Preserving Architecture From the Past
Humans always have been builders. The architecture that early humans
leave tells us something about how they lived and what they believed
was important in life. Many people feel that it is important to save old
buildings, whenever possible, because they are important links to history.
Buildings can be historic even if they are as old as the pyramids in Egypt
or Stonehenge in England. A railroad depot, place of worship, or house
near where you live might be important to the history of your community.
There are many reasons for preserving architecture from the past.
Some buildings should be preserved because their appearance sets a
historic trend, like the Robie House in Chicago, Illinois, or the Empire
State Building in New York City. Some buildings should be preserved
because they link us to the past, like Independence Hall in Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, or the Alamo in San Antonio, Texas. Finally, some buildings
should be preserved because they can be used for another purpose. For
example, a railroad depot might become a restaurant, or a warehouse
might become loft apartments.
Remodeling older buildings for another use is called adaptive reuse.
Think of it as the ultimate in recycling, saving materials and craftsman-
ship that might be impossible to replace today. Many times, buildings
that have been preserved and remodeled for another use make the most
interesting places to live and work.
Monticello, near Charlottesville, Virginia, 1770–1808; Thomas Jefferson, architect
.History of Architecture





ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 23
.How Architecture Happens
How Architecture
Happens
The process of designing and constructing an architectural
project may take a few months or a few years, depending on the
size of the project. Throughout the design process, the architect
works closely with his or her client. The client might be the
owner of the project or someone who represents the interests of
the owner. The architect also will work with many other people
during the project, including engineers, government officials,
builders (sometimes called general contractors), and manufac-
turers of building materials.
Scale model of Globe Life Park in Arlington, Texas; Harwood K. Smith Inc.
with David M. Schwarz, architects
Often, architects must present their project plans to city
councils or planning and zoning commissions to gain
approval to build the project.


24 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
How Architecture Happens.
To arrive at a design solution for a project, architects use
a problem-solving process that follows several steps, or design
phases. Each design phase divides the work effort into small
parts so that the architect can consider all the issues that will
lead to a successful conclusion. The consistent use of design
phases makes it less likely that the architect will forget an
important part of the project.
Programming Phase
The first step in the design of a project is to develop a list of
requirements for the project, called a program. The program
describes all of the functions that the building and its surround-
ing site must accommodate, including the relationships of the
functions to one another, the needs of each function, and
specific goals the project must achieve. The program must
address the level of quality and the number of facilities needed
by the client. The final form of the program usually is a written
document that contains descriptions and diagrams showing
important relationships between certain functions, and lists
of rooms or spaces and their required sizes. The diagrams some-
times are called “bubble diagrams” because they use round or
oval shapes to signify the spaces.
The architect must work closely with the client during the programming
phase to understand the client’s expectations for the project. The program-
ming phase defines the problem that the architect must solve, and the
success of the project can be determined by the quality of work performed
in this first step.
The design process


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 25
.How Architecture Happens
For requirement 4, you will need to create a floor plan of a room where you live or
where your troop meets. This floor plan shows an entire house.


26 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
How Architecture Happens.
Schematic Design Phase
The project’s design begins to take shape in this phase. Using
the program as a guide, the architect develops general ideas, or
concepts, to solve the problem of the overall building and site
layout. Usually, the architect develops several conceptual plans
to find the best solution to the problem. The architect then
presents the conceptual plans to the client for review and
approval. After analyzing the pros and cons, the architect and
client agree to a concept. Then, the architect draws detailed
floor plans and site plans based on the final design concept.
The architect may meet with the client many times as the
design develops.
The architect also begins to design the exterior and interior
during this phase. When the schematic design phase is complete,
the architect will prepare drawings that show these ideas. Usually,
the schematic design package includes drawings for a site plan,
floor plans, exterior elevations (what the building will look
like from all sides), and possibly a three-dimensional, realistic
drawing of the building so the client can see how the completed
project will look. This perspective view is called a rendering. It is
a work of art in pencil, ink, oil paints, watercolors, or computer-
aided design and drafting (CADD), created by the architect or a
commercial artist who specializes in rendering.
Design Development Phase
The architect continues to develop the design concept in greater
detail, finalizing interior spaces and refining the exterior
appearance. The architect investigates and selects the important
materials needed for the exterior
and interior construction and
determines the systems that
will make the building useful
to its future occupants, such
as air-conditioning, heating,
electrical power, lighting, and
their supporting structures.
All of these systems require
space. The architect must make
sure that all of the parts fit
within the building and within
the overall design concept and
the owner’s budget.
Some architects
use computers
to create
renderings of the
completed project.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 27
.How Architecture Happens
Contract Documents Phase
To make it possible for someone to build the project, the architect
prepares instructions for how to construct it. The architect makes
detailed drawings of each part of the project so the builder can
see how each part fits together. The architect also writes a book
of requirements, called specifications, that includes the exact
materials, systems, and components that will be used in construc-
tion. Except for the construction phase, this usually is the longest
phase of the design process. It is called the contract documents
phase because the plans that the architect prepares will become
part of the contract between the project owner and the builder.
Negotiation, or Bidding Phase
Once the plans and specifications have been completed, the
project owner “offers” the project to one or more builders, called
general contractors; each of them determines a cost for building
the project. The cost that each builder submits to the project
owner for consideration is called a bid. The architect frequently
assists the client in evaluating the bids and selecting a general
contractor. When the architect’s client
selects a contractor, and that contractor
agrees to construct the project, it is
called an award, and the builder is said
to have been awarded the contract.
Construction Phase
Once the owner and the builder agree
on the cost and sign a contract,
construction can finally begin. While
the project is under construction, the
architect answers the contractor’s
questions, visits the site to observe
the progress of the work, checks to
see if the specified materials and
systems are being installed, and
helps solve problems that arise. When
construction is complete, the project
owner moves in and the architect’s
services come to an end.
The construction
phase is an
exciting time for
the owner, builder,
and architect. For
architects, it is the
phase during
which their ideas
and concepts
become reality.
Parkway Hills Baptist Church, Plano, Texas,
phase 3 of construction; Rogers-O’Brien
Construction Company, contractor;
Leo A. Daly, architect


28 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
How Architecture Happens.
Sustainable Architecture
Many of today’s architects recognize the desire of their clients to create
more earth- and eco-friendly structures. They use a variety of methods to
incorporate sustainable architecture (sometimes called green architecture)
in their projects. The trick is to strike the right balance between environ-
mental and ecological considerations, budgetary limitations, and
community needs.
Experts say that buildings burn up about 40 percent of the total
energy consumed in this country and around 70 percent of the electricity
used. Architects who design sustainable buildings understand how using
alternative methods can result in tremendous energy and cost savings.
Among the practices they incorporate are the use of more durable mate-
rials for greater longevity, the use of local materials (to support local
businesses and cut down on shipping costs) and renewable resources,
and conservative use of space, energy, and water.
Renewable resources are those that recover faster than the demand
for products they are used to make. Examples include bamboo that can
be used for fencing, flooring made from cork, or agricultural waste prod-
ucts that are pressed into fiberboard and used for some cabinetry.
Sustainable architecture has become increasingly important to the
building industry and to clients—from homeowners to companies,
government offices, and other businesses. They want the completed
structure to work together with the surrounding environment, to
efficiently fulfill the needs of the users and occupants, and to be
conservative with natural resources. Here are some examples of
sustainable architecture.
Artists for Humanity EpiCenter, Boston,
Mass.; architect/engineer: Arrowstreet Inc.
This 23,500-square-foot building uses
natural ventilation, ceiling fans, daylighting
(a combination of natural and artificial
lighting), and is superinsulated. Architects
added a heat recovery system that utilizes
warm exhaust air exiting the building, and
a night cooling system that uses ventilation
to lower the temperature in the facility.
Solar panels mounted on the roof convert


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 29
.How Architecture Happens
sunlight into electrical energy for building use. These and other energy-
saving techniques have helped Artists for Humanity recapture
approximately 100 percent of the building’s bottom-line energy costs.
Capitol Area East End Complex, Block 225, Sacramento, Calif.; architect/
engineer: Fentress Bradburn Architects. This building has more than
5,500 photovoltaic panels, which produce up to 160 kilowatts of pollution-
free energy, resulting in a cooling-cost reduction of up to 40 percent.
Architects incorporated an underfloor air system for more efficient
distribution of cooled air throughout the building. Its “cool roof,”
constructed of materials made to reflect the sun’s heat, can reduce
the surface temperature of the roof up to 100 degrees Fahrenheit,
further reducing energy costs.
Clackamas High School, Clackamas, Ore.; architect/engineer: BOORA
Architects Inc. Its multiple sustainable features help this high school
use about 40 percent less energy than a building of similar scope.
The well-insulated building utilizes natural ventilation (which utilizes
the distribution of air pressure surrounding a building to enhance the
flow of air around doors and windows), daylighting, high-efficiency
boilers for heating, and other energy-saving methods.


30 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
How Architecture Happens.
Energy Resource Center, Downey, Calif.; architect/engineer: WLC
Architects Inc. Among the many sustainable features of this building are
its cool roof and an evaporative cooling system that operates according
to the humidity of the air in the building. The center also generates
energy using microturbines, very small turbines that produce electricity.
Its windows have low e-glazing, a very thin coating that reduces the
transfer of the sun’s heat through the glass. The daylighting techniques
and efficient lighting used throughout the facility reduce its electric
lighting consumption by 40 percent.
Erie Ellington Homes Project, Boston, Mass.; architect/engineer: Elton +
Hampton Architects. These homes feature daylighting, are superinsu-
lated, and have high-efficiency glazing on the windows, among other
resource-saving methods. Construction costs in 2003 amounted to $92
per square foot, compared with $115 per square foot for the average
cost of affordable housing at the time.To help this project fit the needs
of residents, Energy Star appliances were installed in every home.
(Energy Star is a program administered by the Environmental
Protection Agency to identify and promote energy-saving appliances
and practices.) Residents save about 50 percent on heating, electricity,
and water expenses.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 31
.How Architecture Happens
Occupational Safety and Health Administration, Salt Lake Technical
Center, Sandy, Utah; architect/engineer: Architectural Nexus.
Its high-efficiency chillers,
daylighting, cool roof, low-use
water fixtures and appliances,
and many other sustainable
elements allow this building
to reduce its energy consump-
tion by 50 percent when
compared with buildings of
similar scope. The facility is
well insulated and also boasts
a heat recovery system,
efficient lighting, and
high-efficiency glazing on the windows.
Rio Grande Conservatory, Albuquerque, N.M.; architect/engineer:
Mazria Inc. Among the building’s energy-saving features are its
mechanical and natural ventilation systems, use of daylighting and
other efficient lighting methods, and highly engineered glazing on
windows. In designing the conservatory, the architect applied proper
building orientation and window sizing and placement, natural heat
convection and radiation, and other energy-saving applications.
The facility uses only about 5 to 10 percent of the energy normally
consumed by a building of similar structure.


32 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
How Architecture Happens.
Tools That Architects Use
Just as sports teams must use the proper equipment to play a
game, an architect’s team must use the right equipment to make
architecture happen. Architects use drawings to show how an
idea for a project can look and how it can be constructed.
An architect’s first ideas about a building’s design often are
expressed through quick freehand sketches made with a pen
or pencil on a sketchpad.
As the design of a project becomes more detailed, the
architect prepares drawings that have the exact proportions as
the real building, only smaller. These are called scale drawings,
and they are prepared by hand on a drawing table or electronically
on a computer. When using a drawing table, the architect draws
on a durable paper called vellum, which has a plastic-like texture,
and uses drafting instruments to accurately measure and draw
the design. Drafting instruments include parallel bars, triangles,
a compass, and a ruler that is called a scale.
Architects also prepare drawings using computer-aided
design and drafting (CADD) software. An architect skilled in
CADD can use a computer to draw a building design quickly
and accurately. Computers also can be used to prepare three-
dimensional drawings and renderings of a project to show the
client how the building will look from different views, inside
and out. Some architects use computers to create realistic
animated images of the building from the point of view of a
person walking through it.
Architects use the computer to “build” a building
by modeling each of its components and locating
all of the parts and pieces in relation to one another
through what is called building information modeling.
BIM software allows designers to produce a digital
model of the building in multiple dimensions, with
views from all angles. The software extends beyond
geometry and allows designers to include aspects
of the building such as utilities, electronics, security,
space, light, cost estimates, objects in relation to other
objects, and more.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 33
.How Architecture Happens
Another tool architects use to explain their designs to
others is a scale model. Models can be built of inexpensive
materials such as cardboard or polystyrene plastic. Architects
use rough study models to explore various design ideas and
to imagine the building’s final form. Sometimes, after a design
has been completed, an architect will make a very realistic
and often very expensive model that shows the client and the
public how the building will look.
Information that an architect must know and use in build-
ing design constantly changes. New ideas develop, new building
materials become available, and styles and tastes change. The
architect’s library includes books and magazines that show how
many types of buildings were designed. The library also includes
technical books that show how to construct and use building
materials and components.
Copies of the various building laws always are found in an architect’s
library or online. Known as building codes and standards, these laws
explain the minimum requirements for building design. Accessibility
Guidelines, often referred to as Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
guidelines, are also an important guide to designing accessible public and
commercial facilities. Architects also keep samples of building materials
to use in selecting the finishes and colors that will create the visual affects
required by the design concept.
An architect’s
studio also is a
business office,
and it needs all
of the tools found
in one, such as
computers for
accounting and
writing letters
and reports,
telephones,
a copier, and
a fax machine
for sending
letters and
documents over
telephone lines.
Scale model





ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 35
.Education and Career Opportunities in Architecture
Education and
Career Opportunities
in Architecture
The education and career opportunities of an architect are
varied and unlimited. Because of this, people with artistic
talent and people with strong analytical and problem-solving
abilities can find a place in the architectural profession.
Education
To be able to design safe, useful spaces for many different
uses, an architect must have a broad, well-rounded education
and must understand many things about how people live and
work. An architecture degree takes five or six years to complete
and includes courses in art, science, mathematics, history, and
humanities (the study of human thought and relationships)
as well as literature, writing, and business administration.
An architect’s education also includes artistic training, such as
freehand drawing, mechanical drawing, and
model building. Many universities in the
United States and other countries house
schools of architecture.
Internship
Upon graduation with a professional degree
in architecture, the student planning to
become an architect must work for a specific
period of time in an architect’s studio to
learn more about architecture as well as
construction methods and materials. This is
called an internship, and like graduates


36 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Education and Career Opportunities in Architecture.
from medical school, graduates from architecture school are
called interns. Depending on the college degree and the state in
which the candidate is employed, the length of the internship
can be three or more years. Generally, the more education a per-
son has, the shorter the internship. Once a candidate has met
the educational requirements and completed an internship, he
or she is eligible to take the licensing examination.
Registration
Because an architect’s work affects the health, safety, and
welfare of the public, architects must be registered or licensed.
Every state has similar, but not always identical, eligibility
requirements. Each state requires some combination of educa-
tion and experience before an architect is eligible to take that
state’s licensing exam. Architectural interns who successfully
complete the examination are registered and granted a license
to practice architecture in that state. Some of the differences in
state requirements are exactly what you would expect. For
example, California requires special technical knowledge about
designing for earthquakes, while Florida requires specialized
knowledge about designing for hurricanes.
Every state recognizes professional degrees from colleges
that have an accredited architectural program leading to a
bachelor of architecture degree (a five-year program) or a
master of architecture degree (a one- or two-year program in
addition to a four-year undergraduate degree in a subject related
to architecture). In most master’s degree programs, students
select building design, urban design, city planning, interior
architecture, or another specialized field. Many times, the four-
year undergraduate degree for those pursuing a master’s degree
is a bachelor of arts or a bachelor of environmental design.
Career Opportunities
Architects have a lot of different career options. Historically,
the architect was seen as an individual practicing alone.
Today, single, or private, practices exist, but other interesting
opportunities for architects exist as well. Some architectural
firms are very large and handle very large projects. Some
architects specialize in a particular building type, while others
take on a variety of projects. Some large architectural firms
may have construction and/or real estate divisions.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 37
.Education and Career Opportunities in Architecture
Architects are especially qualified for city planning and
urban design work for local governments, such as townships,
cities, and counties. State and federal governments also
hire architects to design and plan government facilities, such
as a state capitol building. Architects also work in related
professions, such as real estate, construction law, politics,
or public service. Any task that involves problem solving is
appropriate for a person with an education in architecture.
Architectural
training, with
its emphasis on
history, art,
humanities,
and problem
solving, prepares
architects to meet
a wide variety
of challenges,
with benefits for
all of society.
Star City Casino, Sydney, Australia; The Hillier Group, architect


38 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
How to Learn More About Architecture.
How to Learn More
About Architecture
If your activities toward earning the Architecture merit badge
have stirred your interest, here are other ways you can learn
more about architects and architecture.
Visit your local library. Whether large or small, the library
likely will have a section on architecture and architectural
history. The library also will have biographies about well-known
architects and probably books with drawings and photographs
of notable buildings.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 39
.How to Learn More About Architecture
Renaissance
Leon Alberti (1404–72; Italy)
Geovanni Bernini (1598–1680; Italy)
Donato Bramante (1444–1514; Italy)
Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446; Italy)
Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475–1564; Italy)
Inigo Jones (1573–1652; England)
Andrea Palladio (1508–80; Italy)
Baroque
Jose Churriguera (1665–1725; Spain)
Nicholas Hawksmoor (1661–1736; England)
Neo-Classical
Charles Bulfinch (1763–1844; America)
Thomas Hastings (1860–1929; America)
Claude-Nicolas Ledoux (1736–1806; France)
Sir John Soane (1753–1837; England)
Stanford White (1853–1906; America)
Pre-Modern
Gustave Eiffel (1832–1923; France)
Sir Joseph Paxton (1803–65; England)
Early Modern
Henry Bacon (1866–1924; America)
Antonio Gaudi (1852–1926; Spain)
Marion Mahony Griffin (1871–1961; America)
Walter Gropius (1883–1969; Germany)
Le Corbusier (1887–1965; Switzerland/France)
Charles Rennie Mackintosh
(1868–1928; Scotland)
Erich Mendelsohn (1887–1953; Germany)
Ludwig Mies van der Rohe (1886–1969;
Germany/America)
Notable Architects
Louis Sullivan (1856–1924; America)
Paul Williams (1894–1980; America)
Frank Lloyd Wright (1867–1959; America)
Mid-Modern
Alvar Aalto (1898–1976; Finland)
Denise Scott Brown (1931– ; America)
Michael Graves (1934– 2015; America)
Eileen Gray (1878–1976; Ireland)
Philip Johnson (1906–2005; America)
E. Fay Jones (1921–2004; America)
Louis Kahn (1901–74; America)
Richard Meier (1934– ; America)
Richard Neutra (1892–1970; Austria)
Late Modern
Frank Gehry (1929– ; Canada/America)
Kohn Pederson Fox (Firm in America,
China, and England)
I. M. Pei (1917– ; America)
César Pelli (1926– ; Argentina/America)
Edward Durell Stone (1902–78; America)
Kenzo Tange (1913–2005; Japan)
Bernard Tschumi (1944– ; Switzerland)
Brooks + Scarpa (Firm in America)
Arts and Crafts Movement
Charles (1868–1957; America) and
Henry Greene (1870–1954; America)
Bernard Maybeck (1882–1957; America)
H. H. Richardson (1838–86; America)


40 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
How to Learn More About Architecture.
If you are interested in a career in architecture, look for
opportunities at school to develop skills that will be useful
to you as an architect. Consider courses in art, science,
mathematics, history, and computer and hand drafting. Try to
recognize the principles taught in these classes that will be
useful to you as an architect. Also, an architect must be a good
leader and team player. The teamwork and leadership skills you
learn as a Scout will help prepare you to lead a design
team as an architect.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 41
.How to Learn More About Architecture
Start carrying a sketchbook. You can get one at most stores
that sell art or school supplies. Each day, you can add a sketch
of a building or landscape scene that you see and add notes
about the people and activities you find there. This activity
will sharpen your ability to observe and visualize, and it will
help develop your skill in design.
If you would rather photograph
the buildings you see, you can keep
a photo album of the interesting
places you visit. Or, make a scrap-
book of pictures or articles about
interesting buildings, gardens,
and landscapes that you find in
newspapers and magazines.
Another good way to learn
more about what architects
do would be to approach a
local architect about summer
or after-school employment.
Tyler Street Christian Academy, Dallas, Texas; The Beck Group, architect


42 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Glossary of Architectural Terms.
Glossary of
Architectural Terms
arcade. A series of arches carried on columns.
atrium. An open courtyard surrounded by a building, or a
covered entrance hall.
building information modeling (BIM). The process of using a
computer program to “build” a digital model of all systems and
components that make up the building.
buttress. A masonry or brickwork projection that strengthens
a building.
clerestory. The part of a building that rises above the roofs of
the other parts.
computer-aided design and drafting (CADD). Computer pro-
grams architects use to make drawings and visualize a building.
cornice. A decorative projection along the top of wall.
cupola. The element placed at the roof ridge to provide light
or ventilation; common to barns.
dimension. A scaled measurement of building elements
shown on a drawing.
dormer. A window placed vertically in a sloping roof.
façade. The side of a building emphasized architecturally,
usually the front of a building.
fall. A building’s principal room, or sometimes the principal
building in a complex.
flute, or fluting. Vertical channeling, roughly semicircular
in cross section and used principally on columns.
footing. The bottom element that anchors a wall or column
to the ground.
head. The top of a door, window, or other opening.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 43
.Glossary of Architectural Terms
jamb. The side of a door, window, or other opening.
joist. A timber stretched from wall-to-wall to support a floor above.
keystone. The central, uppermost element in an arch.
Leadership in Energy-Efficient Design (LEED). A certification
system that rates buildings’ energy efficiency.
loggia. A covered space or building open on one or more sides
with arcades or colonnades.
molding. In architecture, a continuous, narrow surface designed
to break up a wider surface as an accent or decoration.
pillar. A column.
pitch. The slope of a ramp or roof.
plotter. A printer used to print drawings on large sheets of paper.
portico. A covered entrance to a building.
rafter. The beams that form the support for a roof.
rendering. A detailed artistic drawing that shows the anticipated
final appearance of a building.
rose window. The large, circular window with tracery and stained
glass that is frequently used in the façades of Gothic churches.
rotunda. A round building, or a large round room.
scale. A reduced-size proportion used with drawings and
models to represent the true size of a building or design
(for example: 1/4" = 1', 1' = 20', etc.).
sustainable architecture. Architecture that includes
environmentally conscious design techniques.
tracing. A way to duplicate a drawing by following
lines seen through a transparent medium
such as paper vellum.
truss. A framework of beams
attached in a manner to brace
each other and to form a
single structural element.
vellum. A durable,
high-quality paper used
for drawing and printing.
Loggia at a monastery in Catalonia, Spain


44 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Architecture Resources.
Scouting Resources
Art, Computers, Drafting, Engineering,
Model Design and Building, Photography,
Surveying, and Sustainability merit
badge pamphlets
Books
ARCHITECTURAL DESIGN, HISTORY,
AND NOTABLE BUILDINGS
Ching, Francis D.K. Architecture: Form,
Space, & Order, 4th ed. John Wiley
and Sons, 2014.
———. Building Construction Illustrated,
5th ed. John Wiley and Sons. 2014.
Gossel, Peter. Modern Architecture A–Z.
Taschen, 2010.
Isaacson, Phillip M. Round Buildings,
Square Buildings, and Buildings
That Wiggle Like a Fish. Knopf, 2001.
Kostof, Spiro. A History of Architecture:
Settings and Rituals, 2nd ed.
Oxford University Press, 1995.
Macaulay, David. City: A Story of
Roman Planning and Construction.
HMH Books for Young Readers, 1983.
———. Cathedral: The Story of Its
Construction. Houghton Mifflin, 1973.
Nelson, Peter. The Tree House Book.
Universe, 2000.
Rifkind, Carole. A Field Guide to
American Architecture. Random
House Value Publishing, 1987.
Sharp, Dennis. Twentieth Century
Architecture: A Visual History.
Images Publishing, 2006.
Susanka, Sarah, and Kira Obolensky. The
Not So Big House. Taunton Press, 2009.
Susanka, Sarah. Creating the Not So
Big House. Taunton Press. 2002.
Wilson, Forrest. What It Feels Like
to Be a Building. John Wiley
and Sons, 1988.
Architecture Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 45
.Architecture Resources
BIOGRAPHIES
Heinz, Thomas A. The Vision of
Frank Lloyd Wright. Chartwell
Books, 2016.
Hoag, Edwin, and Joy Hoag. Masters of
Modern Architecture: Frank Lloyd
Wright, Le Corbusier,
Mies van der Rohe, and Walter
Gropius. Bobbs-Merrill, 1977.
Huxtable, Ada Louise. Frank Lloyd
Wright: A Life. Penguin, 2008.
Ivey, Robert Adams. Fay Jones.
McGraw-Hill Professional, 2001.
Rubalcaba, Jill. I.M. Pei: Architect
of Time, Place and Purpose.
Skyscape. 2011.
Sieden, L. Steven. A Fuller View:
Buckminster Fuller’s Vision of
Hope and Abundance for All.
Divine Arts, 2012.
DRAWINGS AND MODELS
Biesty, Stephen, and Richard Platt.
Stephen Biesty’s Incredible Cross-
Sections. Knopf, 1992.
Eisen, David. Fun With Architecture.
Viking Press, 1992.
Maddex, Diane. Architects Make Zigzags:
Looking at Architecture From A to Z.
John Wiley and Sons, 1986.
Salvadori, Mario. The Art of Construction,
3rd ed. Chicago Review Press, 2000.
Werner, Megan. Model Making.
Princeton Architectural Press, 2011.
Getty Center, Los Angeles, California;
Richard Meier, architect


46 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Architecture Resources.
Organizations and Websites
American Architectural Foundation
202-787-1001
archfoundation.org
The American Institute of Architects
1735 New York Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20006-5292
800-242-3837
aia.org
The American Institute of
Architecture Students
202-808-0075
aias.org
Association of Collegiate
Schools of Architecture
1735 New York Ave. NW
Washington, DC 20006-5292
202-785-2324
acsa-arch.org
Association of Licensed Architects
847-382-0630
alatoday.org
National Council of Architectural
Registration Boards
202-879-0520
ncarb.org
National Organization of
Minority Architects
noma.net
Society of American
Registered Architects
888-385-7272
sara-national.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America acknowledges
and thanks the volunteers of the
Architecture Merit Badge Task Group of
the American Institute of Architects for
their work and expertise in preparing
this pamphlet for the Architecture merit
badge.
Thanks to members of Troop 219,
Plano, Texas, for assistance with
photography. We are grateful to Urban
Design Group, an architecture firm in
Dallas, Texas, for providing the venue
for photography.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 47
.Architecture Resources
Photo and Illustration Credits
Architectural Nexus Inc./Jeff Gardner,
courtesy—page 31 (OSHA building)
Arrowstreet Inc./Richard Mandelkorn,
courtesy—page 28
The Beck Group, courtesy—page 41
(Tyler Street Christian Academy)
BOORA Architects/Michael Mathers,
courtesy—page 29
Elton + Hampton Architects/Bruce
Hampton, courtesy—page 30
Mazria Inc./Craig Campbell, courtesy—
page 31 (Rio Grande Conservatory)
Richard B. Ferrier, FAIA, courtesy—all
illustrations on pages 10–21 and 45
Harwood K. Smith Inc., courtesy—
pages 23 and 33
The Hillier Group/Patrick Bingham-Hall,
courtesy—page 37
The Hillier Group/Wolfgang Hoyt,
courtesy—page 8
Greg Hursley, courtesy—page 3
(Thorncrown Chapel)
Cory J. Kilduff, courtesy—page 24
Rogers-O’Brien Construction Company,
courtesy—page 27
Wikipedia.org/Enoch Lau,
courtesy—page 5
Wikipedia/Sxenko, courtesy—
cover (Fallingwater)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—pages 40 and 41
(Scout drawing)
Pine Eagle Chapel, Camp Tiak Scout
Camp, near Wiggins, Mississippi;
Fay Jones + Maurice Jennings Architects


Webb Bridge Park
Master Plan
WEST VALLEY TRAIL LOOP
Selectively clear for the gravel trail
alignment and minimize ground
disturbance by using a special
aggregate base technique.
SOCCER FIELDS
Construct 3 (220' x 300') sodded, irrigated fields with
a restroom/concession building (1000sf). Parking east
and west of the fields will provide 60 spaces/field.
The lower field will feature a sand profile drainage
system. An optional feature includes construction of
embankment seating and lighting at the lower field.
WEST VALLEY
NATURAL AREA
Restore the deeply incised
watercourse. Develop
interpretive wood chip trail
with signage and benches.
MULTIUSE TRAIL
Develop 12' wide, 7500' length,
ADA-accessible trail for pedestrians,
cyclists, and wheelchair users.
Provide grade-separated crossings
of the park drive. Rest benches and
emergency telephone to be included.
WHITE OAK PAVILION
Construct a rustic themed pavilion
(approx. 1800sf) overlooking the
valley from a promontory in a
grove of live oaks. Develop several
outdoor picnic stations in this vicinity.
Include reforestation planting and
arboricultural treatment as appropriate.
POST OAK PAVILION
Construct a rustic themed picnic
pavilion (approx. 1600sf) situated in
the post oak grove. Develop additional
picnic stations and restore upland
mesophytic forest community.
PARK ENTRANCE
Construct paved driveaway and
deceleration lane with sidewalk.
Entry sign and associated landscape
development to include shrub layer
and low-maintenance groundcover
plantings. Ensure development of
dense screen buffer.
Note: This master plan is referenced in the chapter “Landscape Architecture and Design.”
WEBB BRIDGE ROAD


EAST VALLEY NATURAL AREA
Complete the restoration of the creek
banks. Develop interpretive signage and
benches. Complete aquatic plantings at
pond and restoration of upper valley.
UTILITIES
Extend fire protection and portable water
to serve new facilities. Add parking and
parkway lighting in concert with local
electrical provider. Develop septic fields
in sports fields to support restrooms.
POND
Permanent water feature to provide for
all irrigation needs. Safety shelves with
aquatic plantings are included.
TENNIS FACILITY
Construct four lighted courts in sets of 2.
Develop previous concrete access drive and
a 30-car gravel parking area, walkways and
a rustic pavilion (900sf) overlooking the East
Valley and Pond. Construct a masonry
restroom/pro shop (900sf).
CHILDREN’S PLAY AREA
Construct 12,000sf play area to include static
equipment and swings for a variety of age
groups. Include ADA compliant features.
Construct an adjacent rustic pavilion (900sf)
together with picnic stations. Restore upland
mesophytic forest community.
BASEBALL QUADPLEX
Construct four fields (2 @ 200', 2 @ 285')
to include lighting, irrigation, sports turf,
fences and backstops, masonry restroom/
concession (1000sf), 60 parking spaces/
field, sidewalks and spectator furnishings
(bleachers, benches, picnic tables).
Complete landscape development.
MAINTENANCE FACILITY
Construct a masonry storage/office building
(2000sf) and gravel yard suitable for storage
of maintenance vehicles and supplies.
Complete screen planting as appropriate.
PREVIOUS CONCRETE DRIVEWAY
One-way, 18' wide, 4300' length, previous
concrete driveway. Also open to cyclists.
KIMBALL BRIDGE ROAD
JONES BRIDGE
FOX ROAD


50 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Requirements .
Landscape Architecture
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Landscape-Architecture or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 51
.Landscape Architecture Requirements


52 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Contents
Introduction to Landscape Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
The Deep Roots of Landscape Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
The Field of Landscape Architecture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
The Branches of Landscape Architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Landscape Architecture Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Landscape Architecture and Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Landscape Architecture Education
and Career Development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .89
Landscape Architecture Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 92


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 53
.Introduction to Landscape Architecture
Introduction to
Landscape Architecture
Your earliest experience of landscape architecture was probably
in a sandbox, where you poured water into a moat around a
castle you built using an overturned flowerpot. Then you
jammed a few dandelions into the sand to create a garden near
the castle. A few years later you did some site planning, choos-
ing to build your snow fort on the north side of your house so
the sun would not melt it too fast. After a season or so, you
and a friend framed a tree house in an oak because the leaves
would give plenty of privacy for most of the year.
What you have known since you were a toddler is that a
landscape architect creates places that
people care about and want to visit.
These outdoor places are living
“rooms.” The sky or leafy branches
overhead make a ceiling, the ground
or a body of water makes a floor, and
hedges or fences make walls. Benches,
light fixtures, and sculptures make the
furnishings. Steps, paths, and trails
link separate rooms such as gardens, golf
course holes, and sports fields.
Look around at the outdoor rooms
of your community. Notice neighborhood
parks, soccer fields, school grounds, places
of worship, office parks, shopping malls,
cemeteries, and waterfront recreation
areas. Who designs these places?
Chances are that landscape architects
were involved in the planning and design
of all these outdoor spaces.





ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 55
.The Deep Roots of Landscape Architecture
The Deep Roots of
Landscape Architecture
The practice of landscape architecture is as old as the practice
of architecture because the two fields originally were one.
It was not until the middle of the 19th century, when city
planners and architects recognized the need for public spaces
designed specifically for public enjoyment, that landscape
architecture became a separate vocation. As a profession,
landscape architecture dates only to the 1850s, but as an art,
it dates back thousands of years.
1400 b.c.–a.d. 1850: Gardens
Ancient Egyptians arranged their homes and grounds in a struc-
tured symmetrical design that kept out desert winds and wild
animals, and provided shade, food, and pleasure. The walled
gardens featured trees planted in rows to look like columns and
reflecting pools that helped to balance the height of the trees.
Straight paths or irrigation canals were laid along an axis, a line
that divides space and connects two or more points. This linear
plan shows up today in the layout of major cities.
During the fifth century b.c., the Greeks erected buildings
and created outdoor spaces based on specific design principles
that are still used today. The Greeks planned their cities in
relation to the shape of the land. Rather than shaping the land
and dividing it into linear spaces like the ancient Egyptians,
the Greeks incorporated natural land contours and features
into their city designs. They designated certain sites as sacred
and made public places for parks and markets, and they laid
out athletic fields for events such as the Olympic Games.


56 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
The Deep Roots of Landscape Architecture.
During the first century b.c., the Romans put Greek
knowledge and organizational ideas to use in their landscapes.
They made beautiful cities that were functional. Homes had
piped water, interior courtyards open to the sky, and covered
walkways or vine-covered arbors that connected the house to
the garden. Trees and shrubs were clipped into fanciful shapes,
or topiaries.
The Middle Ages followed the fall of the Roman Empire in
the fifth century. Within fortified walls, monasteries served as
self-sufficient centers of intellectual and agricultural activities.
Here, monks cultivated separate gardens for medicinal plants,
vegetables and cooking herbs, and flowers grown for decoration
in cathedrals and for festivals. These cloister gardens provided
a quiet, secluded place for meditation. From a well or fountain
at the center of the courtyard, four paths branched out to the
north, east, south, and west, symbolizing the four rivers of
Paradise radiating from the “living water,” or spiritual center.
Cloister garden


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 57
.The Deep Roots of Landscape Architecture
As the Middle Ages came to a close, Marco Polo of Venice
returned in 1295 from a lengthy stay in China. Through his
writings, the Western world learned about Oriental gardens.
These asymmetrical planting arrangements had two visually
balanced sides, but they did not mirror each other.
Chinese gardens focused on small parts of a larger compo-
sition and small moments, like the first plum blossom of the
new season. Japanese gardens, strongly influenced by Chinese
garden art, reflected a miniature version of nature. Strict rules
of design required a symbolic meaning to be attached to every
element in the garden. For example, a moss-covered rock
surrounded by raked sand might represent an island in the sea.
As the threat of invasion declined, people in Europe
extended their gardens beyond the walls of monasteries and
castles. During the Renaissance in Italy, where the landscape
was steep, designers created gardens as a series of outdoor
rooms connected by terraces, staircases, and ramps. Skillful
engineering produced spectacular fountains and waterfalls.
These villa gardens combined formal shapes with the natural
setting and panoramic views.
French garden designer André Le Nôtre turned classical
garden design into a high art. He adapted the terraces and
staircases of the Italian villa garden to the flat French
landscape and allowed the long axis and distant view of the
setting to add to the dramatic effect. At the world-renowned
Versailles, Le Nôtre worked with architect Louis Le Vau to unify
the buildings, gardens, and site.
Gardens on the Versailles grounds


58 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
The Deep Roots of Landscape Architecture.
For centuries, English gardens contained borrowed elements
from medieval and Renaissance gardens. In the 1700s, Lancelot
“Capability” Brown and other “place makers” influenced people
to turn the formal gardens of country manors into natural land-
scapes. Deliberately staged winding paths, irregular lakes, and
sweeping lawns replaced the straight axis, rectangular pools,
and geometric gardens. In the next century, these changes led
to the development of enormous parklike estates.
English country gardens


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 59
.The Deep Roots of Landscape Architecture
1850–1950: Cemeteries, Public Parks,
and Suburbs
As American towns grew into cities, people feared that over-
crowded graveyards threatened their health, and they waged
campaigns to relocate burial grounds to rural areas. Mount
Auburn, located in a suburb of Boston, was the first landscaped
cemetery in the United States. The English natural landscape
style influenced the design to create a hilly, wooded setting.
When the cemetery opened to the public in 1831, city dwellers
and tourists flocked to it. Rural cemeteries provided green
sanctuaries away from bustling urban areas.
Frederick Law Olmsted, the first to call himself a landscape
architect, understood the public’s need for scenic open spaces.
He traveled to Europe and England to study the great public
grounds and gardens, and returned with the desire to create
“people’s parks” for all social classes. In the 1850s, Olmsted
and Calvert Vaux, his architectural partner, designed Central
Park in New York City. They composed a rural landscape that
became the model for naturalistic parks throughout the United
States. Olmsted also promoted a national forest park system
and the preservation of natural wonders such as Niagara Falls.
In the late 1860s, Olmsted designed one of the nation’s
first residential subdivisions in a suburb outside Chicago.
He planned curving streets, paved sidewalks, street-side tree
plantings, and natural public spaces. Railroads and tree-lined
parkways connected the suburb to the city. With the success
of his projects, Olmsted pioneered city planning and beautifica-
tion efforts, as well as landscape design intended more for the
modern public than the affluent.


60 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
The Deep Roots of Landscape Architecture.
1950–21st Century: Land-Use Planning
and Environmental Work
In the prosperous years after World War II, millions of Americans
bought new cars and settled into new homes in new suburbs.
The population boomed, and cities and towns sprawled farther
into the countryside. In the ’60s and ’70s, malls sprang up to
provide convenient shopping. In the ’80s, multiuse complexes
such as office parks began to appear. The suburbs became
not only places to live and shop, but also places to work.
Landscape architects planned circulation routes for new roads
and recreational trails, designed mega-mall and office park
campuses, and created common outdoor spaces for planned
residential communities.
PUBLIC BUILDINGS
MIXED-USE BUILDINGS
RESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS
VILLAGE
GREEN
TOWN
HALL
PUBLIC
WORKS
CREATED
WETLAND


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 61
.The Deep Roots of Landscape Architecture
People began to worry about using up our natural
resources and polluting the environment. Landscape architects
developed comprehensive plans to make the best use of large
land areas while protecting or restoring resources. They also
determined ways to redesign urban centers and preserve
historic areas.
As visionaries, landscape architects have the opportunity
to take a leading role in shaping our future. Their challenge is
to balance the growth, health, and natural beauty of our com-
munities with environmentally friendly design, technological
advancements, and diminished resources. These are exciting
times to be a landscape architect!
Landscape architects today are leaders in the area of
sustainable, “green” designs.





ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 63
.The Field of Landscape Architecture
The Field of
Landscape Architecture
Landscape architecture addresses the complicated relationships
between constructed and natural environments. It deals with
the planning, design, and management of land not covered by
buildings. Landscape architects create outdoor spaces that are
more safe, healthy, environmentally resilient, pleasing, and
workable than they would be without a design plan. The ulti-
mate goal is to design a site that unifies the buildings, the
beauty of the natural setting, and the site’s intended use.
People often confuse landscape architecture with gardening
and landscape maintenance. In general, landscape architecture
is concerned with the methodical design of any outdoor space,
whether it is a small front yard or a large public plaza. While
some landscape architects choose to work on residential
projects, most landscape architects focus their work on private
developments and public spaces such as parks, urban plazas,
parkways, retail areas, and school campuses. However, because
landscape architects know how to design irrigation systems, solve
drainage problems, and construct retaining walls and decks,
some choose to design residential projects.
Landscape architecture covers a broad
field of land development projects. The
range of work includes land closely related
to a single building, such as a front yard,
and land around and between groups of
buildings, such as the grounds of assisted-
living communities, industrial complexes,
and zoos. The work also includes land
bordering transportation and utility corridors,
such as areas along freeways, waterways,
and power easements, as well as open-space
land, such as parks and recreation areas.


64 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
The Field of Landscape Architecture.
Landscape architecture is an interdisciplinary profession
that often features collaborative design teams. Training includes
design, engineering, technical analysis, urban planning, historical
preservation, natural resources, and the study of human behavior.
Because of this diverse education, the landscape architect is a
natural candidate to lead a team of design professionals, including
architects and civil engineers, through a land development project.
Landscape architects participate at all levels of land-use
decision making, from site-specific to comprehensive regional
planning. One of the main goals of the profession is to guide
changes in land use.
Site planning concentrates on an area that has already
been designated for a specific use, such as a 26-acre office
park. The plan brings natural features, pedestrian and auto
circulation, building and facility locations, and landscaping
into a cohesive design.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 65
.The Field of Landscape Architecture
Land-use planning focuses on large-scale developments
that are subdivided into several sites for different uses. For
example, a 7,400-acre development for a new town would be
subdivided into areas for single-family and multifamily hous-
ing, health care and educational facilities, commercial and
industrial centers, and recreation.
Land-use planning deals with even larger land areas. It
involves the comprehensive evaluation of land use, conservation,
and restoration for a large area, such as a county or region.
This level of planning considers economic, social, and
environmental issues.
The profession of landscape architecture is committed to
finding a balance between meeting the community’s need for
development and protecting the natural environment. The
landscape architect stands between the client’s interest and
the public’s interest, and has a responsibility to serve both.





ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 67
.The Branches of Landscape Architecture
The Branches of
Landscape Architecture
As you know from reading about the history of landscape
architecture, garden design and plant selection have long been
the basis of this profession. Today, however, most of the busi-
ness has shifted to the more complex issues of mixed-use
developments, water quality, and regional planning and design.
Projects range from private gardens to public recreation areas,
planned communities, transportation systems, forest parks, and
storm water management.
The field of landscape architecture offers opportunities to
work on a variety of planning and design programs. Landscape
architects can choose a broad practice or focus on specific areas.
Below are descriptions of the most popular specialties.
Residential Landscape Design
Residential landscape design involves working with
homeowners to design their landscapes to fit their specific
needs. For new home construction, this specialty will sometimes
include determining the best placement of the home on the
building site. Front yards are designed differently from
backyards. Front yard landscapes need to be welcoming, with
plantings that complement the home, and an entry walkway
designed to direct one’s eye to the front door. Framing the home
with trees is another key feature of a well-planned front yard.
Backyard landscape designs will often include spaces for play,
entertainment, and relaxation. Vegetable gardens, lawns, kids’
play areas, patios, decks, swimming pools, ponds, kitchens and
fireplaces are examples of such spaces. Trees and shrubs, often
illuminated with landscape lights, are strategically located for
visual interest and to provide buffers for sound and privacy.


68 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
The Branches of Landscape Architecture.
Commercial Planning and Design
Commercial planning and design encompasses all the ways
land is used by the public in suburban areas. Examples include
office and business parks, retail areas, government offices, sports
fields, and places of worship. The landscape architect determines the
best sites for buildings, parking lots, walkways, and green spaces.
Then he or she designs the landscape and hardscape features.
Community Planning and Design
The community planning and design specialty focuses on
developing comprehensive plans for single-family and multi-
family residential neighborhoods. The master plan includes
street arrangements, open spaces, sidewalks, and recreation
areas. The landscape architect also designs entry features, such
as entry walls or gates, signage, lighting, and landscape, for
these community developments.
Park and Recreation Planning and Design
Park and recreation design has evolved in the past two centuries.
Activity parks used to be large open spaces with playground
equipment and a ball field. Today’s parks provide areas for var-
ious recreational activities such as skateboarding, cycling, and
soccer. Landscape architects take care to separate pedestrian
and vehicular traffic.
Some landscape architects work in public-sector
agencies, such as the U.S. National Park Service
and U.S. Forest Service.
Landscape architects plan and design not only parks as small
as a city block, but also huge natural areas to create national
forest parks and wildlife refuges. Designing something as large as
a national park is quite a feat compared to remodeling a lawn; the
landscape architect must be careful to protect the environment that
already exists, including endangered species’ habitats; wetland
areas; natural light and sound sources; and trailheads, camping,
and visitor facilities. All plans must follow specific National
Park Service and governmental guidelines, such as the National
Environmental Policy Act that stresses a “balance between use and
preservation of natural and cultural resources.”


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 69
.The Branches of Landscape Architecture
Campus Planning and Design
Any site with two or more buildings accessible to the public is
considered a campus. However, campus planning and design is
most often associated with the grounds of universities and
other educational institutions. The landscape architect creates
a master plan based on the various functions of the campus.
The plan includes outdoor living, learning, and recreational
spaces; pedestrian and vehicular routes; and building sites for
future expansion.
Urban Planning and Design
Urban planning and design focuses on city centers. Projects
usually involve downtown redevelopment and often include
historic restoration. The landscape architect must balance
densely populated areas with the need for open space. Much
of the design deals with hardscapes such as plazas, parks, and
promenades. Streetscaping plans concern the improvement of
the street environment. These plans include designs for paved
surfaces, benches, light fixtures, trash receptacles, signs, and
plant materials.


70 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
The Branches of Landscape Architecture.
Resort Planning and Design
Resort planning and design specializes in vacation and resort
facilities such as hotels, theme parks, golf courses, and beach
resorts. The landscape architect works with the owner to create
the desired effect of the resort. Whether for an amusement
park, a links-style golf course, or a Caribbean development,
ultimately, the project creates a place of pleasure, escape,
and relaxation.
Historic Preservation
Landscape architects work on the preservation, commemoration,
and restoration of historic sites and have built landscapes
throughout the world. They must often strike a balance between
contemporary use and preserving the historic legacy of a site.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 71
.The Branches of Landscape Architecture
Environmental Planning and Design
Environmental planning and design promotes the wise use and
management of our natural resources. Plans might preserve
woodland wildlife habitats and redwood forests, conserve water
and solar energy, or reclaim wetlands. Because of today’s con-
cerns for balancing the care of the environment with the needs
of the community, this is one of the fastest growing specialties
of landscape architecture.
The Sinking City
Mexico City sits atop water, but the city must
pump the water it uses across mountain ranges at
outrageous costs. The water below the city is not
from rivers, but from aquifers. Pumping water
out of these underground lakes causes the land
to subside, or sink. Today the center of Mexico City
is 34 feet lower than when Montezuma II ruled the
Aztecs in the 1500s.
Smart Landscape
There are arid regions throughout the
United States that don’t receive the
rainfall necessary to sustain bountiful
landscaping. Therefore, landscape
architects use a type of landscaping
called xeriscaping in which every effort
is made to use water-conserving
methods and avoid losing water to
evaporation or run-off. Naturally, cactus
is one of the plants used.





ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 73
.Landscape Architecture Basics
Landscape
Architecture Basics
A good design plan does not just happen. It depends on the
combination of artistic principles, appropriate materials, and
scientific analysis. Yet, a dash of imagination guarantees that
no two landscape architects or Scouts will develop the same
plan for the same project.
Design Basics
The Greeks figured out more than 2,000 years ago that great
design is based on certain principles and values. The applica-
tion of the following design basics creates a cohesive and
harmonious composition.
In landscape design planning, scale is the relationship of
the design to the people who will use it. A person senses when
the setting feels too large, too small, or just right.
The plan on the left is well-balanced; the elements in the plan are proportionate.
The plan on the right has ill-placed elements that are out of proportion.


74 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Basics.
Proportion refers to the proper relationship of one part of
the composition to another, and to the whole. The important
question is, does that element look correctly placed?
Emphasis, often called accent, is anything in the design
that creates a spot of interest. The effect could be a contrast in
color, like a tall green cypress tree against a vivid blue sky. It
could also be a contrast in form or texture.
Repetition is the duplication of the same element several or
many times.
Rhythm, often called sequence, breaks the monotony of
repetition. It changes the routine by introducing, at regular
intervals, one or two new elements into the series.
This plan for a parking lot shows how ornamental planters and flower
beds use rhythm to help break up the monotony of the parking spaces.
Sculpture serves as an accent to the landscape.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 75
.Landscape Architecture Basics
Balance is the visual stability of a composition. A symmet-
rical arrangement, with mirrored images on each side of an
axis, gives a sense of formality. An asymmetrical design, with
an irregular yet balanced arrangement of objects, gives a sense
of informality.
Unity is the quality of being complete—when the separate
elements serve the whole and nothing seems out of place
or added for decoration. When all elements come together
convincingly, the goal of the overall design has been met.
Materials
A landscape design changes daily as the plants and trees grow,
flower, and eventually die and materials weather. The landscape
architect must keep in mind not only what the plants will look like
after installation, but also what they will look like at full growth.
The design professional selects trees, shrubs, and ground covers
that will thrive in the particular soil and climatic conditions.
Landscape architects choose plant materials for their
unique characteristics and contributions to the design plan.
Deciduous trees and shrubs often turn different colors and
lose their leaves during fall and winter. They are important in
the landscape because they block the sun’s rays in the summer
and allow light through in the winter.
The symmetrical plan, left, gives the area a more formal feeling. The asymmetrical
design, right, gives the area a more relaxed feeling.


76 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Basics.
Evergreen trees and shrubs keep their foliage year-round.
They stay “ever” green and can provide a barrier to sound and
wind as well as a visual barrier. Within the evergreen category
are two subcategories:
• Coniferous trees and shrubs, which bear cones and have
narrow, needlelike leaves
• Broad-leafed evergreen trees and shrubs, which do not bear
cones and have broad leaves that stay green year-round
Ground covers are low, wide-spreading plants that hug the
earth. Like lawns, they form the floors of outdoor “living
rooms.” Landscape architects use ground covers where it is
This chart shows the shapes and sizes of trees, many of which you have probably seen at
parks and other landscaped areas.
AMERICAN
ASH
SWEET
GUM
SUGAR
MAPLE
WHITE
FIR DOUGLAS
FIR HEMLOCK EUROPEAN
LARCH AUSTRIAN
PINE RED
PINE SCOTCH
PINE WHITE
PINE BLACK HILLS
SPRUCE NORWAY
SPRUCE SERBIAN
SPRUCE WHITE
SPRUCE
NORWAY
MAPLE SILVER
MAPLE BUR
OAK ENGLISH
OAK PIN
OAK RED
OAK WHITE
OAK SYCAMORE TULIP
TREE BLACK
WALNUT
HACKBERRY WASHINGTON
HAWTHORN ENGLISH
HORNBEAM SHAGBARK
HICKORY HORSE
CHESTNUT KENTUCKY
COPPER TREE BASSWOOD
OR LINDEN UTTLE LEAF
LINDEN CUCUMBER
TREE
GREEN
ASH AMUR
CHERRY EUROPEAN
BEECH CANOE
BIRCH BUCKEYE AMUR
CORK TREE AMERICAN
ELM CHINESE
ELM MOLINE
ELM GINKGO SOUR
GUM
COLUMNAR WEEPING OVAL PYRAMIDAL UPRIGHT IRREGULAR VASESPREADING ROUNDED
THORNLESS
HONEY
LOCUST


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 77
.Landscape Architecture Basics
too shady for grass to grow well or too steep to mow, or where
the color and texture adds more to the design than grass would.
When choosing plant materials, the landscape architect
considers size, form, texture, and color, and applies the basic
design principles to the planting arrangement.
Although many people think of landscapes as planted green
spaces on natural ground, landscapes also include nonliving
materials and hard surfaces such as playgrounds, urban plazas,
covered malls, roof gardens, arbors, and decks.
A hardscape is anything that is not soil or plant material. In
terms of landscape design, that includes the materials for paved
surfaces, steps, walls, fences, terraces, and water features. The
landscape architect uses hardscape materials much like plant
materials to create design effects. For example, pea gravel con-
trasts with flagstones just as delicate ferns contrast with large-
leaved lilies. Most plans include both hardscape and landscape
materials to give the design structure and distinction, or relief.
Tools
In the early stages of the design process, the landscape architect
inventories the site and produces maps and diagrams. Hand
drawing and computer-generated plans can be used for this
initial part of the design process. Existing site elements, such as
structures, sidewalks, and trees, must be accurately indicated on
the drawing, which is also called a base map. To locate an
object, such as a tree, measure in two directions from fixed
points on the base map.
These two viewpoints
show how to position and
measure fixed and existing
elements on the diagram.
OVERHEAD OR PLAN VIEW
ELEVATION OR SIDE VIEW


78 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Basics.
The architect draws the base map to scale using
a triangular ruler called an architect’s scale. This
ruler has inches divided into different increments,
with each increment representing different
lengths. For example, on the side of the scale
marked 1
⁄8, one inch is divided into eight equal
parts. Each part equals one foot, so six-eighths
of an inch is equal to six feet.
In the past, architects drew their own design plans based on
information gathered from land surveys and topographic maps.
Today they must know how to use computer-aided design and
drafting (CADD) programs. The computer generates three-
dimensional information, which can be analyzed in various ways,
including applying animation to simulate possible future changes.
ONE FOOT AT
1⁄8” SCALE
ENLARGEMENT
OF 1⁄8” SCALE
ONE INCH
DIVIDED INTO
EIGHT PARTS
Architects sometimes
work with engineer’s
scales, which have
increments in 10s,
100s, and so on,
instead of the fractions
used in architectural
scales (shown here).
The engineer’s scale
is used most often
for master plans and
designs involving
larger tracts of land.
TRIANGULAR ARCHITECT’S SCALE
The architect’s scale makes the designer’s
task of drawing elements in a design plan
to scale much simpler.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 79
.Landscape Architecture Basics
While hand-drawn plans and sketches are still used in landscape
architecture, the profession is turning more and more to computer-aided
and digital representation. The two most common tools used in this type
of landscape planning are computer-aided design and drafting (CADD)
and geographic information system (GIS) programs. The centerfold
spread shows how effective a CADD-based drawing can be for landscape
architects as they share their proposal with others.
CADD software has been widely used by architects and engineers
for years. Now, it also enables the landscape architect to “draw” a three-
dimensional plan on a computer screen with lines, shapes, and points
that represent anything from a row of trees or shrubs to water pipelines
running underground. This image can be saved and edited and updated
with image-editing software, if the landscape architect’s—or the client’s—
ideas change.
While CADD programs can be used alone, they are often used along
with GIS technology. GIS is a method of technology that links a map to a
database of information, and it has become a very important tool for busi-
nesses, government agencies, and the military. With GIS, a large city can
create a website that shows a street map complete with bus and subway
stops. It is more a part of everyday life than you might think; for example,
if you use the internet or a GPS system to find the locations of the movie
theaters nearest your house or hotels in a city where you are planning a
vacation, you are using GIS technology.
This master plan is shown in greater detail in the center of this book.





ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 81
.Landscape Architecture and Design
Landscape Architecture
and Design
Design is the process of developing a physical solution to a
planning decision. The landscape architect must understand
the plan, its goals, and its limitations. Once the client signs a
contract to hire the landscape architect, the design process
begins. Below are the six progressive stages of design develop-
ment, from determining the client’s priorities and budget to
constructing the project.
Program
In the first stage of the design process, the landscape architect
and the client discuss what items make up the project. These
items or uses for the site, as a whole, are called the program.
For example, the client is a local city that wants to develop a
park. This park, or program, should contain a certain number of
baseball fields, parking areas, a skate park, a refreshment stand,
and a trail system, and it has a specific budget for construction.
The landscape architect must analyze all the program elements
so that nothing is left out of the design.
At this stage, the landscape architect requests fundamental
information to make a base map of the property. These facts
include property boundaries, site topography, location of major
trees and shrubs, and current zoning conditions for the property.


82 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture and Design.
Site Inventory and Analysis
The site inventory provides a record of the project site’s
physical characteristics on one or more overlay sheets of the
base map. Notes and ideas made on copies of the base map
produce the foundation for future design. The landscape
architect visits the site and identifies the key positive and
negative features, such as the following:
• Soil conditions
• Sun and shade variety at different times of the day and year
• Wind direction in summer and winter
• Streams and drainage areas
• Views to and from the property
• Existing conditions
• Prominently positioned trees, called specimen trees
• Unique landforms
During the visit, the landscape architect takes photographs of
the site to use as visual reminders back at the office.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 83
.Landscape Architecture and Design
The site analysis uses the inventory information to deter-
mine positive and negative issues concerning the development
of the project. For example, in the park project, the view from
the baseball bleachers is a sewage treatment facility. The land-
scape architect would note on the site analysis that there is a
negative view that requires screening.
The landscape architect uses diagrams and other graphic
illustrations to indicate the directions of slopes, drainage,
wind, sight lines, and other natural and cultural elements.
North orientation and the drawing scale are always noted on
maps and designs. Drawings and documents are produced by
hand and computer for presentation purposes.
The site inventory and analysis, as well as the program
information gathered from the client, become the basis for
the project design.
Schematic Design
Early designs explore the program elements and their functional
relationships. These loose drawings, or schematics, are based on
the information collected in the previous stage. They allow the
landscape architect to play with different arrangements to create
the most desirable design.


Site analysis for a park
SUBDIVISION—
MAINTAIN BUFFERS
AND CONTROLLED
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS.
LARGE TRACT
EQUESTRIAN—
SUITABLE FOR
PRESERVATION
AND/OR PARK
EXPANSION.
PROBABLE
FUTURE
COMMERCIAL
REDEVELOPMENT
PARCELS—
RECOMMENDED
FOR PARK
EXPANSION.
PROBABLE COMMERCIAL
REDEVELOPMENT PARCELS
PROBABLE
COMMERCIAL
REDEVELOPMENT
PARCELS
PROBABLE COMMERCIAL
REDEVELOPMENT PARCELS—
SUITABLE FOR PARK
EXPANSION.
LARGE TRACT EQUESTRIAN—
SUITABLE FOR PRESERVATION
AND/OR PARK EXPANSION.
SMALL TRACT
AGRICULTURAL—SUITABLE
FOR PRESERVATION.
LAKE WINDWARD
ELEMENTARY
SCHOOL—DEVELOP
PATH LINKAGE.
PROBABLE
COMMERCIAL
REDEVELOPMENT
PARCELS
PROBABLE COMMERCIAL
REDEVELOPMENT PARCELS
WEBB BRIDGE ROAD
KIMBALL BRIDGE ROAD
FOX ROAD
JONES BRIDGE


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 85
.Landscape Architecture and Design
Design Development
During the design development stage, the landscape architect
extends and tests alternative design ideas. Program elements
such as buildings, parking, roads, sidewalks, and open spaces
are drawn to scale. The landscape architect examines the
topography of the site to make sure that the design will work
on the land. Design elements such as sheltered seating and
water features are detailed. The landscape architect selects
hardscape materials like brick, stone, or asphalt paving, and
plant materials like large shade trees or evergreen shrubs.
Specific plants and trees usually are not selected until
the construction documents are prepared. It is important to
remember that plant materials, unlike construction materials,
will continue to grow. The plants’ future size and growth
habits will affect the design’s ultimate success.
The design development drawings usually provide suffi-
cient information for the client to obtain or confirm the cost
of the project. If this were a major land-planning project, the
landscape architect would create a comprehensive design and
implementation strategy at this stage. This strategy, called the
master plan, includes plans for individual projects that will be
built in phases on the site. See the master plan featured on the
center spread of this pamphlet.
Construction Documents
Once the design development drawings or master plan is
approved, the landscape architect prepares the final construc-
tion documents. Today, construction, or contract, documents
are almost always produced on the computer using CADD or
other digital programs. The general contractor will use these
documents to prepare a bid and build the design.
A set of contract documents usually consists of four plans
and several sheets of construction details. The layout plan indi-
cates the location, size, shape, dimensions, and materials of
hardscape elements. It also includes underground and above-
ground site utilities. A grading plan shows the new elevations
of the proposed improvement and how they connect to the
existing grades. This plan also tells the contractor how much dirt
to move. The planting plan names all plants in the design, as
well as their sizes, quantities, and exact locations. Finally,
an irrigation plan shows all areas to be irrigated and the types
and quantities of sprinkler heads to be used.


Plans for Webb Bridge Park community playground. The master plan for this park
appears on the center spread of this pamphlet.
CHALLENGE CLIMBER
(AGE 10–12 YRS)
SWINGS
12 TOTAL,
4 FOR TOTS
COMMEMORATIVE
BRICK THREAD
INTERMITTENT STREAM
FED BY DEEP WELL WATER
AND PAVED WITH RIVER
SLICKS
3' CONCRETE WALK FOR
PREFERRED ACCESS TO
K–6 PLAY FEATURES
35' HEXAGON PAVILION
WITH GLU-LAM BEAMS
AND ARCHITECTURAL
SHINGLE ROOF
K–6 PLAY
PODS 3 EACH
TOTALING 6955SF
TUBULAR CHIMES
VINE ARCH TUNNEL
BUTTERFLY GARDEN
SUNDIAL STAGE TO
ADDRESS LAWN AREA
CONCRETE LOOP 3' WIDE
W/ “FOSSIL PRINTS”
SAND PLAY AREA
W/ STONE BORDER
FOUND OBJECT BIN
SECRET GARDEN
W/ STORYTELLING
SEATING (SURROUNDED
BY RINGS OF BIRCH AND
CRYPTOMERIA)
PRE-SCHOOL PLAY PODS
5 EACH TOTALING 3300SF
FENCED ENCLOSURE
EXISTING TREES
TYPICAL TO REMAIN
7' CONCRETE WALK
W/ GENTLE ADA GRADE
GATED ACCESS W/ ADA
PARKING AISLES AND
STACKED STONE WALL/PIERS


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 87
.Landscape Architecture and Design
Contract Administration
When the contract documents are completed, either the
landscape architect or the client puts the project out to bid
to qualified contractors. If the client is a government agency,
then that agency usually bids the documents and chooses
the best contractor.
Once construction begins, the landscape architect visits
the site periodically to make sure the project is being built as
designed and to specifications.
Periodic visits by the landscape architect help ensure the construction is
going as planned.





ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 89
.Landscape Architecture Education and Career Development
Landscape Architecture
Education and Career
Development
Education
If you are interested in pursuing a degree in landscape archi-
tecture, find out which colleges and universities offer accredited
programs in this field. Landscape architecture may be a university
department under the umbrella of the colleges of architecture,
agriculture, or environmental design. Because landscape archi-
tecture is an interdisciplinary field, course requirements cover
a range of subjects from design and drawing to art and history,
planning and economics, construction techniques, and social and
natural sciences. Four to five years of study typically lead to one
of two undergraduate degrees: bachelor of landscape architecture
(BLA) or bachelor of science in landscape architecture (BSLA).
There are typically three types of graduate degrees. A first-
professional master of landscape architecture (MLA) is for people
who hold an undergraduate degree in a different field and wish
to practice as a landscape architect. This degree typically requires
three years of full-time study or teaching. A second-professional
degree (MLA) is for those who hold an undergraduate degree in
landscape architecture or a related discipline. This degree requires
two years or less of study. A master’s of art, master’s of science,
or doctorate degree in landscape architecture is for those who
want to do research or teach in the discipline but do not wish to
be a licensed, practicing landscape architect.
Log on to the
American Society
of Landscape
Architects’
website at
ASLA.org to find
out more about
the landscape
architecture
profession and
schools that
educate landscape
architects.


90 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Education and Career Development.
Their knowledge of a variety of related fields gives landscape architects
the expertise necessary to collaborate with professionals such as the
ones below to help ensure the design of the outdoor space meets its
intended function.
Architects are licensed professionals who have studied the art and science
of building design in order to construct buildings that are safe, economical,
functional, and aesthetically pleasing. Their work involves a variety of
skills, from mathematics and engineering to communication and super-
vision. They may design a simple structure such as a home or place of
worship, or they may work with others to plan and coordinate large-scale
structures such as a college campus or an airport terminal.
Civil engineers are trained in the design and construction of public works
structures such as roads, tunnels, bridges, and water supply and sewage
systems. Often, civil engineers work at construction sites and may hold
an administrative or supervisory position there. Civil engineers who offer
their services directly to the public must be licensed.
Horticulturists study the science and art of growing flowers, fruits, plants,
and vegetables. They use their knowledge of genetics, biology, engineer-
ing, economics, and sociology to produce crops with better human
nutritional value and to enhance the physical beauty of our environment.
Horticulturists may work in greenhouses or with farm agencies as
producers, marketers, or inspectors, or in research or landscape design
at a zoo or park.
Landscape contractors assist in landscape design, installation, and main-
tenance. With knowledge of carpentry, masonry, gardening, plumbing,
and electricity, they prepare a plot of land for its landscape design. Some
landscape contractors work only with the hardscape aspects of a project,
while others may collaborate with horticulturists and landscape architects
in the placement of trees, shrubs, flowers, etc.
Urban planners work with local governments to formulate plans for the
short- and long-term growth and renewal of urban and suburban com-
munities. They study economic, environmental, and social trends and
problems to determine the best use of land and resources. In develop-
ing their plan for a community, such as schools and retail areas, urban
planners must consider issues such as air pollution, traffic congestion,
legislation, and zoning codes.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 91
.Landscape Architecture Education and Career Development
Licensure
All states require landscape architects to be licensed. In states
that have a licensing provision called a title act, you cannot
call yourself a “landscape architect” unless you are licensed.
You can do some of the same work a landscape architect does
by using another title, such as landscape designer.
Under another provision called a practice act, you must
have a license to work as a landscape architect. This is an
important difference because landscape architects have formal
training in critical areas such as structural construction, drainage,
and irrigation, which many landscape designers lack.
Candidates for licensure must pass a national test called
the Landscape Architect Registration Examination (LARE).
Often, landscape architects in-training must serve internships
first or work for a certain period of time under the supervision
of a licensed landscape architect before taking this exam.
Landscape architects often hold a record with an
organization called the Council of Landscape Architectural
Registration Boards. CLARB assists landscape architects in
maintaining an accurate record of their work and education
experiences, and assists with obtaining a license in different
states or countries. Landscape architects can also be required to
continue their education in order to maintain their license.
Career Opportunities
As a landscape architect, you can find work in the private or
public sectors, or in the academic world. Many people work for
themselves as residential landscape architects. Others join
private landscape architecture firms or companies that employ
teams of design professionals from different fields. Government
agencies involved with larger scale land planning, development,
and resource management employ landscape architects. At
colleges and universities, you can conduct research or educate
the next wave of landscape architects.
Because they have a working knowledge of architecture,
civil engineering, urban planning, and environmental impact
design, landscape architects can take advantage of many career
opportunities. Consider this exciting field for your own career!
Each state sets its
own requirements
for licensure,
but in most states
practice acts are
the standard.


92 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Resources.
Scouting Literature
Environmental Science, Forestry,
Gardening, Plant Science, Soil and
Water Conservation, and Sustainability
merit badge pamphlets
Books
Bertauski, Tony. Plan Graphics for
the Landscape Designer, 3rd ed.
Waveland Press, 2018.
Blake, Peter. God’s Own Junkyard: The
Planned Deterioration of America’s
Landscape. Holt, Rinehart and
Winston, 1979.
Booth, Norman K., FASLA, and
James E. Hiss. Residential
Landscape Architecture: Design
Process for the Private Residence,
7th ed. Pearson, 2017.
Church, Thomas D., Grace Hall, and
Michael Laurie. Gardens Are for
People, 3rd ed. University of
California Press, 1995.
Dee, Catherine. Form and Fabric in
Landscape Architecture: A Visual
Introduction. Taylor & Francis, 2001.
Douglas, William Lake, et al. Garden
Design: History, Principles, Elements,
Practice. Smithmark, 1994.
Foster, Kelleann, RLA, ASLA. Becoming
a Landscape Architect: A Guide to
Careers in Design. Wiley, 2009.
Grant, Reid, ASLA. Landscape Graphics.
Watson-Guptill, 2002.
Marsh, William M. Landscape Planning:
Environmental Applications, 5th ed.
Wiley, 2010.
McHarg, Ian L. Design with Nature.
John Wiley and Sons, 1995.
Rybczynski, Witold. A Clearing in the
Distance: Frederick Law Olmsted and
America in the Nineteenth Century.
Scribner, 2000.
Starke, Barry, and John Ormsbee
Simonds. Landscape Architecture:
A Manual of Environmental Planning
and Design, 5th ed. McGraw Hill, 2013.
Landscape
Architecture Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE 93
.Landscape Architecture Resources
Magazines
Garden Design
855-624-5110
gardendesign.com
Landscape Architecture
636 Eye St., NW
Washington, DC 20001-3736
202-898-2444
landscapearchitecturemagazine.org
Organizations and
Websites
American Society of
Landscape Architects (ASLA)
636 Eye St., NW
Washington, DC 20001-3736
202-898-2444
asla.org
The ASLA is a national organiza-
tion of landscape architects. Its goal is
to promote the profession, educational
programs, and the careful planning of
natural environments.
Council of Educators in
Landscape Architecture (CELA)
919-674-4185
thecela.org
An organization of educational
programs in the United States and
Canada, the CELA promotes quality
and professionalism in landscape
architecture education and publishes
new research in the field.
Council of Landscape Architectural
Registration Boards (CLARB)
571-432-0332
clarb.org
CLARB prepares and scores the
exams for students and professionals
seeking licensure in landscape architec-
ture. The organization provides services
to landscape architects and students to
help them obtain certification.
Landscape Architecture
Foundation (LAF)
02-331-7070
lafoundation.org
The foundation offers scholarships
and internships to students who wish to
study landscape architecture.
Acknowledgments
For this edition of the Landscape
Architecture merit badge pamphlet,
Scouting America is grateful to Associate
Professor Judy Brittenum, FASLA,
Department of Landscape Architecture,
University of Arkansas–Fayetteville (now
retired); Caye Cook, ASLA; Ron
Leighton, ASLA; Pat O’Leary, ASLA;
Steven Saling, ASLA; Rex Schuder,
ASLA; Toby Sneed, ASLA; and Lori
Woodham for sharing their time and
expertise. Thank you for the continued
assistance from Kenneth Laxton, ASLA,
of Environment West Landscape Services
and Erin McCown Foster, PLA, of M&P
Landscaping, for their service in ensur-
ing this merit badge pamphlet is current
and relevant.


94 ARCHITECTURE AND LANDSCAPE ARCHITECTURE
Landscape Architecture Resources.
Thanks to Professor Emeritus Van L.
Cox, FASLA, Louisiana State University,
for his contribution of illustrations to
support this pamphlet. Special thanks
to John Gnoffo, ASLA, who took the
time to assist with the photography
and visual elements.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
City of Alpharetta, Georgia, Parks and
Recreation Department, courtesy;
plan prepared by CERULEA,
Alpharetta, Georgia—pages 48–49
(center spread), 79, 84, and 86
Prof. Emeritus Van L. Cox, FASLA,
Louisiana State University—all
illustrations on pages 73, 74, 75,
and 77
Getty Images—page 38
Scott R. Melrose & Associates, PA—
page 60
The Morton Arboretum, Lisle, Illinois
(adapted from a chart that originated
from The Morton Arboretum)—
page 76
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—cover
(Central Park plan), pages 54, 56,
57, and 58 (English country gardens)
Wikipedia/Sxenko, courtesy—
cover (Fallingwater)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—page 62
Daniel Giles—pages 51, 53, 63–64 (all),
69–70 (both), and 72 (office park)
John McDearmon—page 78
(architect’s scale)


Notes


Notes