MINING
IN SOCIETY
STEM-Based


MINING IN SOCIETY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
On our cover: Mining provides the 30 minerals it takes to make a smart-
phone and up to 12 for a bicycle. Mining equipment, typically enormous
like these haul trucks, dwarf the pickup truck in the open pit mine.


35737
ISBN 978-0-8395-0049-0
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Mining-In-Society or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


MINING IN SOCIETY 3


4 MINING IN SOCIETY


MINING IN SOCIETY 5





Contents
Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Minerals and Rocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Exploring for Minerals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Mine Planning and Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Mineral Processing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Mining in the Future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Health and Safety in Mines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Sustainability in Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Careers in Mining . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Mining Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
The largest haul trucks have tires up to 13 feet or more in diameter, each
costing $42,500. The haul truck has a sticker price of about $5 million.





MINING IN SOCIETY 9
.Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth
Introduction to Mining:
Earth’s Mineral Wealth
Mining is the removal of materials of value from Earth so they can
be used by society to create products and services we need.
Miners have a saying: “If it can’t be grown, it has to be
mined.” Look around your room. Notice everything that was
made from something grown, like wood or cotton. Now look at
all the things in the room that were not grown, such as plaster,
glass, and metallic objects. These were made using materials
that were mined from Earth. Yet even the things that were
grown required equipment for their planting, cultivation, and
harvesting; this equipment was made from minerals.
How important is mining to society? From communica-
tions, transportation, power, construction, agriculture, and med-
icine to education, entertainment, and recreation, every aspect
of society relies on mining. Whether it’s a car, computer, sur-
geon’s scalpel, smartphone, television, goalpost, or almost any
other object you can name, the materials for making it (or for
making the machines that produce it) must come from a mine.
What’s in Your Smartphone?
Producing a typical smartphone
calls for the following metals and
elements found in minerals:
aluminum, antimony, beryllium,
cadmium, carbon, chromium,
cobalt, copper, gallium, gold,
indium, iron, lanthanum, lead,
lithium, manganese, mercury,
neodymium, nickel, niobium,
nitrogen,oxygen, palladium,
platinum,silicon, silver, tantalum, tin,
tungsten, vanadium, zinc.


10 MINING IN SOCIETY
Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth.
Mining produces coal for generating electricity and for
use as a raw material for many industrial processes. Uranium,
used mostly for nuclear power, is also mined. Even the
devices that convert renewable energy (solar, wind, water) to
electricity are made from mined materials.
Minerals in Your Everyday Life
Many minerals must be mined to manufacture a bicycle—here are just
a few.
Aluminum Titanium Silica Sulfur Carbon
Rapid communications, information technologies, and the ability to store,
retrieve, and transmit data for education, industry, and recreation—such as
video games and music downloads—are important to us. Mining provides
the raw materials for all the hardware for these conveniences. For example,
about 34 different products from mining are required to produce a car; a
smartphone requires about 30.
1 Rubber contains sulfur, zinc, salt, iodine, and silica.
2 Steel contains mainly iron, carbon, and manganese.
3 Stainless steel contains mainly iron, chromium, and nickel.
TITANIUM OR STAINLESS
STEEL3 SPOKES
FRAME MADE OF A COMBINATION OF
ALUMINUM, STEEL2, MOLYBDENUM,
MAGNESIUM, GRAPHITE, CARBON FIBER,
TITANIUM, AND SCANDIUM ALLOYS
STEEL AND ALUMINUM
GEARS AND SEAT POST
RUBBER1 TIRES
IRON AND STEEL CABLES
BRAKES MADE OF ALUMINUM, STEEL,
MAGNESIUM, AND RUBBER1
STEEL, ALUMINUM, OR
TITANIUM HANDLEBARS


MINING IN SOCIETY 11
.Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth
The Importance of Mining
In geology, a mineral is a naturally occurring crystalline substance
with its own chemical formula and its own distinctive physical
properties. A rock may be made up of one or more minerals.
In mining, the term mineral has a wider meaning. It refers to
all the substances that are extracted from Earth for human use.
Mined minerals are classified as metallic, energy, or industrial.
• Metallic elements and compounds conduct heat and electric-
ity, are ductile (can be drawn or stretched into wire), mallea-
ble (can be hammered into sheets), and shiny. Examples are
copper, aluminum, iron, and zinc.
• Energy minerals mostly supply electrical and mechanical
power by their combustion. They can also be used as a feed
stock (raw materials) for liquid transportation fuels and coke
(a solid fuel made by heating coal in the absence of air),
which is used to make steel. Fossil fuels, such as coal, are
energy minerals. Another is uranium, which undergoes
nuclear fission in a reactor to produce heat, which turns
water into steam, which drives a turbine to make electricity.
• Industrial minerals are neither metals nor fuels, but are
mined because we use them every day: in construction, in
manufacturing, and even in the food we eat. Examples
include clay, sand, limestone, gypsum, sulfur, salt, quartz
and pumice.
Source: Minerals Education Coalition
In soccer, the ball and protective gear require many minerals.
SYNTHETIC
LEATHER COVER:
MICA, LIME, SALT,
GYPSUM
FOAM RUBBER LINING:
COBALT, MANGANESE,
POTASH, SALT, ANTIMONY
BLADDER: SALT, SULFUR,
BARITE, LIME, GYPSUM,
MICA, MAGNESIUM,
TITANIUM, ZINC, ANTIMONY,
BAUXITE/ALUMINA, SILICON
STITCHING, GLUE: ANTIMONY,
COBALT, MANGANESE,
POTASH
FIBERGLASS: QUARTZ, BORON,
LIME, FLUORSPAR
PLASTIC: TALC, MICA, LIME,
QUARTZ, GYPSUM
ELASTIC: SULFUR,
COBALT, MANGANESE,
POTASH, SALT,
ANTIMONY


12 MINING IN SOCIETY
Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth.
Your home is built of numerous materials that were mined. Are
the outside walls of your home or apartment made of brick,
stone, or aluminum siding? All had to come from a mine at one
stage or another. In a typical home, the inside walls are
wallboard made of gypsum. The foundation is concrete with
crushed stone in it, and the roofing shingles contain fine
crushed stone. Window glass is made by combining silica sand,
dolomite or limestone, and soda ash. Appliances are made
mostly of metals. Paint has mineral pigments. Except for wood
doors and window frames, wood framing, and the like, most of
your home and everything in it came from mines and quarries.
Look Around ...
Everything is made from something.
• 779 pounds of insulation, covering 3,061 square feet,
usually made of glass wool (silica, feldspar, and trona) or
vermiculite (mica containing magnesium, aluminum, iron,
silica, manganese, phosphorus, and sulfur).
• 2,841 square feet of roofing shingles, usually made of
wood or asphalt—composed of silica sands, limestone,
and petroleum.
• 302 pounds of nails and screws (iron and zinc) are used
to fasten the different pieces of lumber together.
• The 18 interior doors and four exterior doors will each
have door knobs, locks, and hinges made of steel or
brass (copper and zinc).
• 268 pounds of glass for 18 windows and one sliding glass door.
Glass is made of trona, silica sand, limestone, and feldspar.
• 501 pounds of copper, used for 280 feet of plumbing pipes and
750 feet of electrical wiring. Pipes can also be made of steel,
plastics and clays.
• 14,218 pounds of gypsum to make 5,550 square feet of interior
wallboard.
• 3,011 square feet of exterior siding, weighing 366 pounds if it’s
aluminum siding.
100 plumbing fittings to hook the
pipe together (copper or iron
and different steel alloys).
170 feet of plastic or metal pipe to
carry the wastewater away to the
sewer, plus the 70 fittings to hook
it together.
226 linear feet of galvanized
(zinc) heating or air-conditioning
ducts to carry the heated or
cooled air throughout the house.
•
•
•
•
All electronics equipment, such as
televisions, telephones, computers,
DVD players, stereos, radios, etc.,
contain no less than 30 different metals
and minerals, including aluminum,
antimony, barite, beryllium, cobalt,
columbium, copper, gallium,
germanium, gold, indium, iron,
lanthanides, lithium, manganese,
mercury, mica, molybdenum, nickel,
platinum, quartz crystals, rhenium,
selenium, silicon, silver, strontium,
tantalum, tellurium, tin, tungsten,
vanadium, yttrium, zinc, and zirconium.
The average automobile contains:
• 2,117 pounds of steel.
• 240 pounds of aluminum.
• 42 pounds of copper.
• 24 pounds of lead.
• 18 pounds of zinc.
• 17 pounds of manganese, plus a variety of other
metals.
• 225 pounds of plastic containing 70 pounds of
mineral reinforcers.
• Petroleum based fuel to make it move—more than
137 billion gallons each year in the U.S.
• There are 250 million passenger vehicles in the U.S.
Insulation, Roofing, Siding, and Hardware
Windows, Plumbing, and Electrical
• 1,010 pounds of appliances made of steel and stainless steel
containing iron, chromium, molybdenum, aluminum, zinc,
copper, lead, and numerous other metals.
• Garbage disposal, which contains an electric motor (copper
and steel), stainless steel, and various plastics and rubber
gaskets reinforced with industrial minerals.
• Kitchen sink, usually made of stainless steel or steel coated
with porcelain (clay), and faucets (a variety of different alloy
steels, copper, zinc, and iron).
• 290 pounds of vinyl flooring, made of petrochemicals filled
with limestone.
• Kitchen utensils, dishes, and silverware, made from various
metals and clays.
Appliances and Floor Covering
210 pounds of ceramic (clay,
feldspar, and limestone), used in
sinks, toilets, and the tile that covers
walls and floors, plus the bathtubs
and/or shower stalls.
Sanitary Facilities
Home Entertainment
Automobile
© 2011 Minerals Education Coalition - Englewood, Colorado USA
• 120,528 pounds of concrete, made by mixing water with sand,
gravel, and cement. Cement is made of limestone, bauxite,
clay, shale, and gypsum. Concrete is reinforced with steel rods (rebar).
• 15,300 pounds of concrete block.
• 21,440 pounds of brick made from mixing various kinds of
sand with different types of clay.
• 54,000 pounds of gravel and stone for decoration
and drainage.
• Underground utility lines provide water, sewer, electricity,
gas, and telephone services.
The size of the average new house is 2,400 square feet and contains three or
more bedrooms, two and one-half bathrooms, a two- or three-car garage, central
air conditioning, and a fireplace, and costs over $250,000.
The cost of materials and labor to assemble that house is about 55 percent of
the selling price. The cost of the lot, and serving that lot with all the different
utilities, can be more than $50,000.
More than a million new single-family houses are built every year in the USA.
Foundation, Walls, and Underground Utilities
More than 16,000 board feet of lumber
and 6,000 square feet of structural
panels (such as plywood) are used to
build the average house. The wood is
used to provide the roofing, flooring,
and interior and exterior walls, as well
as a large part of the insulation and
interior and exterior finishing.
Forest Products
Petroleum products are used to
make the carpet and vinyl flooring,
plastic for water and sewer pipes,
and other items. The paints used
inside and out, and some of the
insulation to conserve energy and to
protect electrical wiring, are
petrochemical products that are filled
with various industrial minerals.
Petrochemicals
Streets
and Roads
• 5-inch-thick paving, made from 94 percent
aggregate and 6 percent oil or asphalt
concentrate, is used to cover the surface of
roadways.
•
•
8 inches of ¾-inch aggregate and fines are
used for a basecourse underneath the
paving.
Existing soil under the basecourse is
compacted to a depth of 8 to 12 inches.
More than a quarter million pounds
of minerals and metals were mined
to provide the foundation and walls
to support the house, the fasteners
(screws and nails) to hold everything
together, the electrical wiring, the
plumbing pipes and fixtures, and the
variety of materials to make it livable.
Minerals and Metals
Graphics by Dennis Herrick
www.MineralsEducationCoalition.org There are 4 million miles of roads in the U.S.•
Sources: U.S. Geological Survey, U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, DOE/Energy Information Admin., Bureau of Transportation, Research and Innovative Technology Admin.
The typical family home is composed of many mined resources. With your parent or
guardian’s permission, you can learn more by visiting the website of the Minerals
Education Coalition at mineralseducationcoalition.org/outreach-awareness/
mining-in-society-merit-badge/
Glass was first
made and used in
the Bronze Age.


MINING IN SOCIETY 13
.Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth
The power to heat and cool homes and to run
entertainment and communications devices comes from
minerals such as coal and uranium. Electricity generated from
energy minerals is transmitted long distances on metal wires—
aluminum and copper. Minerals are essential for affordable and
convenient electricity on which we depend. Without mining
there is no electricity!
Transportation depends on the products of mining.
Bicycles, automobiles, trucks, ships, and airplanes are made
from minerals. Highways and airport runways are made of
quarried crushed stone bonded with asphalt or cement—
all minerals.
Even things we think of as organic (grown) depend on
mining. For example, paper made mostly from wood pulp may
have limestone or kaolin (fine white clay) as a mineral filler or
coating.
Wood products and food crops are grown using
fertilizers that are mined: phosphorous (phosphate),
potassium (potash), and magnesium (dolomite).
The manufacture of farm equipment for
cultivating and harvesting crops also
depends on the mining industry. Farm
machinery is made mostly of steel
(made from iron and carbon), with
copper for wires, aluminum in
engine blocks and wheels, lead in
batteries, and chrome for trim.
For more about rocks and minerals, see
the Geology merit badge pamphlet.
At mealtimes, you use all sorts of minerals. You eat with
metals—stainless steel utensils. You cook with power from
energy minerals. You eat off ceramic dishes, and drink
from glass containers—made from industrial minerals.
Raw chrome ore


14 MINING IN SOCIETY
Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth.
Minerals in Human History
People have depended on Earth’s mineral
wealth throughout history. Periods of
human civilization are named for these
materials—the Stone Age, Bronze Age,
and Iron Age. In prehistoric times,
humans made stone tools and weapons:
arrowheads, spear points, knives, axes, and
hammers, among other objects. People adorned
themselves with necklaces, rings, and amulets made of
stone, and they shaped clay into pots and other containers.
Metals such as copper, gold, and silver, found on or near
the surface of the ground, were first
used as decoration. Gold was easily
noticed in streambeds because of its
bright yellow color. It was easy to
pound and stretch into desired
shapes, often as jewelry and as
objects of art and worship.
For early humans, copper served
many practical purposes: tools, weap-
ons, jewelry, and decoration.
Although copper is brittle in its native
state, people learned to make it more
workable by heating it in a fire
(annealing). Heating also melted the
copper out of the rocks that contained
the metal—a process known as smelting.
Early metalworkers discovered bronze by smelting together
rocks that contained both copper and tin. Bronze is harder, less
brittle, and more durable than copper; tools and weapons of
bronze were better able to maintain a sharp cutting edge. The
Bronze Age was named for this alloy (an alloy is a combination
of two or more metals); its properties made it so significant in
human history.
With technological advances came the Iron
Age, when iron and steel became
extensively used, especially for
cutting tools. Smelted iron was
hammered into the desired
shape to make steel swords and
other weapons and tools.


MINING IN SOCIETY 15
.Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth
In ancient Rome, soldiers carried steel swords,
and they were sometimes paid with another min-
eral: salt. In fact, the word salary comes from the
Latin word for salt, salarium. It was important to
Romans as a food preservative and seasoning. The
Romans built roads to make it easier to ship salt
into the city. For instance, the Via Salaria, a road
between the Adriatic Sea and Rome, made the
delivery of highly valued sea salt faster and easier.
As important as salt was to the ancient Romans,
an even more valuable mineral—gold—helped to
shape the history of North America. It sparked mass
migrations of people in search of their fortunes.
After gold was discovered at Sutter’s Mill,
California, in 1848, more than 300,000 people trav-
eled to California over the next seven years. Known as the
Forty-Niners, the newcomers came by land and sea,
helping to settle the western United States.
Gold was not the only
valuable metal found in the
American West. When silver
was discovered in the
Comstock Lode in 1859,
Virginia City, Nevada, became
a bustling boomtown almost
overnight. San Francisco,
California, grew into a major
financial center because its
banks funded the mining.
Comstock Lode silver helped
finance the Union in the Civil
War (1861–1865).
The Klondike Gold Rush of 1896–1899 brought more
than 100,000 gold seekers to Alaska on their way to the
Yukon region of northwest Canada. The harsh conditions
stopped many, but then in 1899 gold was discovered
in Nome, Alaska, triggering another mad dash by
gold prospectors.


16 MINING IN SOCIETY
Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth.
Because legal battles were waged over claims ownership,
the U.S. Congress in 1866 passed the first law to govern how
Americans could prospect and mine on federal public lands.
Then in 1872, Congress passed the General Mining Act, which
is still in effect today.
One Miner’s Story:
John W. Mackay
John William Mackay (1831–
1902) was born in Dublin,
Ireland. His immigrant parents
came to New York in 1840. As a
20-year-old, Mackay made his
way west, hoping to strike it
rich with the rest of the Forty-
Niners during the California
Gold Rush. He didn’t find much
gold, but in 1873 he struck the
Big Bonanza, one of the
greatest silver veins ever found.
In just four years, the Big Bonanza mine in Nevada
produced over $400 million in silver. As senior partner,
Mackay kept the largest share for himself. When the silver
played out in 1877, he and his partners moved to San
Francisco as millionaires.
Mackay was a great philanthropist. He donated gener-
ously to the Nevada School of Mines, originally established
in 1888 and renamed The Mackay School of Mines to honor
its benefactor. Today the school is called the Mackay School
of Earth Sciences at the University of Nevada, Reno. The
school has graduated generations of mining professionals
who have worked throughout the world.


MINING IN SOCIETY 17
.Introduction to Mining: Earth’s Mineral Wealth
In what other ways have minerals influenced history?
Consider this more recent example. In the 1920s and ’30s, the
Empire of Japan sought to conquer its Asian neighbors. Japan
needed iron and petroleum, which it did not have in large
amounts. China and Southeast Asia, however, were rich in
these mineral resources. To stop Japan’s aggression, the United
States cut off shipments of iron and steel along with oil exports
to Japan. Japan considered this an act of war, and on Dec. 7,
1941, the Japanese attacked the U.S. Navy battleship fleet at
Pearl Harbor, Hawaii. Japan’s surprise attack brought the
United States into World War II.
There are many steps in finding the mineral resource; planning, constructing, and
operating the mine; then closing the mine after the resource is removed. This illustra-
tion shows the sequence of events. Source: Mineral Resources Education Program of
British Columbia
RECLAMATION
(1 TO 4 YEARS)
MONITORING
(5 YEARS OR PERPETUALLY)
AVAILABLE
LAND
RESOURCES
EXPLORATION
(8 TO 10+ YEARS)
ENVIRONMENTAL
ASSESSMENT
AND APPROVAL
(ONGOING STAKEHOLDER
CONSULTATIONS)
CONSTRUCTION
(1 TO 3 YEARS)
OPERATION
(10 TO 100-PLUS YEARS)
CLOSURE
(1 TO 2 YEARS)
Mineral Resources
Development Cycle





MINING IN SOCIETY 19
.Minerals and Rocks
Minerals and Rocks
A rock is made up of one or more minerals, glass (volcanic), or
inorganic and/or organic material. An ore is a type of rock that
can be mined at a profit. The three rock types are igneous, sedi-
mentary, and metamorphic.
• Igneous rocks come from the cooling of molten rock called
magma. Examples include granite, which forms deep inside
Earth, and basalt, which occurs on or near the surface as
volcanic eruptions or lava flows.
• Clastic sedimentary rocks form when particles eroded from
older rocks are transported, deposited, compressed, and
typically cemented into new rock. Examples are sandstone
and shale. Biochemical sedimentary rocks form by
accumulating the remains of organisms that extract materials
dissolved in air and water to form their tissue. Examples are
coal and most limestone. Chemical sedimentary rocks form
by minerals precipitating from fluids or when fluids
evaporate. Examples are rock salt and some limestone.
• Metamorphic rocks form when older rocks are exposed to
high temperature, high pressure, or both, to create a new
rock. Under these conditions, limestone becomes marble,
shale becomes slate, and granite becomes gneiss.


20 MINING IN SOCIETY
Minerals and Rocks.
Geologic events determine where different rock formations
are found that contain the minerals we value. How often geo-
logic events happen determine how commonly or rarely a min-
eral occurs near Earth’s surface. Some common minerals are
mined at many locations. Others are so rare, they are mined in
only a few places on Earth. If a mineral is mined only in foreign
countries, then it must be imported into the United States.
Important Minerals Used Every Day
All three categories of minerals—metallic, energy, and indus-
trial—are mined in the United States. Sand and gravel mines are
the most common. Sand and gravel are used mostly as con-
struction materials. Stone quarries are the next most common
mine, followed by coal mines. The blue triangles on the map of
U.S. mines represent a wide range of less common nonmetal
rocks and minerals such as gypsum and clay. Metal mines
are the least common type of mines in the
United States.
The following describes some important
mined materials: sand, limestone, clay, coal,
copper and gold.
Sand. Sand is a simple material readily
found all over the world. It is used in many
things you encounter every day, such as
glass, concrete, playground sandboxes, beach
volleyball courts, and paint (to give walls a
rough surface texture). You probably know of
more uses, but you might not think of these.
Stone is any hard igneous, sedimentary, or metamorphic
rock used for construction or decoration. It is an example
of an industrial mineral.
Geology is the study of minerals and rocks, the
processes that form them, and how they are distributed
on Earth. The Geology merit badge pamphlet can help
you identify rocks and minerals and understand
their origins.
Native copper
nugget


.Minerals and Rocks
This map, which shows all 12,567 active mining operations in the United States in 2021, illustrates how widespread mining is
in this country. The land seems to be covered by the 12,567 mining operations, but only because the size of the map symbols
is large. In fact, only 2.5 of every 1,000 acres in North America are occupied by mines. From this small area come all the
minerals we use. Interested in learning more about what is mined near you? Visit wwwn.cdc.gov/niosh-mining/MMWC


22 MINING IN SOCIETY
Minerals and Rocks.
• The petroleum industry uses sand in the process of hydraulic
fracturing to improve oil and gas flow in its wells.
• Highway departments spread sand on icy, snowy roads in
winter to keep cars and trucks from sliding.
• Foundries cast metals such as iron and bronze in molds
made of sand. The mold holds the molten metal while it
cools, giving shape to the engine block in your family car,
for instance.
Limestone. Limestone is a common biochemical sedimentary
rock formed mostly from the accumulation of the shells of
marine organisms. Some limestone can form as a chemical
precipitate from fresh or salt water. Here are some everyday
uses of limestone.
• Limestone blocks of different shapes and sizes are cut for
building stone, countertops, flooring, monuments, and
landscape rock.
• Crushed limestone is used in concrete and as a base for
roads and foundations.
• Limestone is the main ingredient in making portland cement.
• Limestone is pulverized into a fine powder for filler in paper,
plastics, and paint.
• Limestone is a soil conditioner, neutralizing acidic soils; a
neutralizer in municipal water treatment; and a scrubbing
agent, removing sulfur from smokestack emissions.
• Limestone removes impurities in glass- and steelmaking;
purifies sugar; and prepares wools and dyes.
• Heated in large kilns, limestone becomes lime (CaO) for use
in steelmaking; removing sulfur from smokestack emissions;
water treatment; and construction. Pure calcite is produced
with lime for use in paper, plastics, paint, toothpaste, food
additives, antacids, and calcium supplements.
The U.S. Geological Survey estimated that in 2022 about
94.5 million metric tons of cement was produced at 96
plants in 34 states and Puerto Rico.


MINING IN SOCIETY 23
.Minerals and Rocks
Clay. Common clay is used to make bricks. Other types of clay
are kaolin, bentonite, and fuller’s earth. The United States is one
of the largest producers and exporters of these. Kaolin is a white
pigment used in papermaking, paint, rubber, and plastics and as
a major component in ceramics such as china, sinks, and toilets.
Bentonite is swelling clay used mainly for muds in drilling for oil
and gas, and in landfill barriers protecting groundwater from tox-
ins that may leak from landfills. Because fuller’s earth absorbs
odors and fluids, it is commonly used in cat litter and spill kits.
Coal. Coal (an energy mineral) is a sedimentary rock formed
from plant debris deposited in swamps and bogs. Sediments
covered the swamps and bogs over millions of years, squeezing
the plant material into a black solid (coal). Coal is classified
into several kinds based on its carbon content and density:
peat, lignite, bituminous, and anthracite. From lowest to
highest—that is, from peat to anthracite—the ranking also
indicates the level of energy released when the coal is burned.
The United States has 25 percent of the known coal in the
world. Discovered as the “burning rock,” coal later provided the
energy to power the industrial revolution over a century ago.
Today it is used mostly for generating about 20 percent of the
country’s electric power.
Coal is also burned in kilns to make bricks, cement, and
lime. In making iron, coal serves as a fuel when converting the
iron ore into iron metal; in steelmaking it serves as a fuel and
as a source of carbon. Coal is important in papermaking and in
chemicals and pharmaceuticals. Products containing coal or its
byproducts include soap, aspirin, dyes, plastics, rayon, nylon,
toothpaste, and cosmetics. Coal mining employs about 20.4
percent of all U.S. miners.
Copper. The most noticeable thing about copper is its color: a
rich reddish-orange. It is one of only two metals with its own
distinctive color (the other is gold). It was easy to find in
ancient times because some of its many ores are green and
blue. Copper was also found in its native metal state.
Copper is an excellent conductor of electricity and heat. It
is ductile (easily drawn into wire); it is malleable (can be
beaten into thin sheets); and it easily forms alloys. Copper is
widely used in electrical wiring, electronics, water pipes and
tubing, and as gutters and roofing material. Copper’s
antimicrobial property makes its use valuable in hospitals,
kitchens, and doctor’s offices.


24 MINING IN SOCIETY
Minerals and Rocks.
Copper’s main alloys are brass and bronze. Brass is an
alloy of copper and zinc; bronze is an alloy of copper and tin.
Bronze is hard and tough and typically used in statues, church
bells, medals like those awarded in the Olympics, and musical
instruments such as cymbals. Brass resists corrosion and has a
bright yellow color, somewhat like gold. Common objects made
of brass include doorknobs, musical instruments like trombones
and trumpets, door keys, and plumbing fixtures such as faucets
and showerheads.
Some of the largest mines in the world today are copper
mines. The metal is in high demand because of its wide variety
of uses, and the search for large deposits never ends. As
civilization depends more on electricity and electronic
technology, the demand for copper will continue.
Gold. Gold is produced at hard rock mines from what are called
lodes (vein or bedrock ore deposits) and a few large placer (river
or lake deposits) mines, as well as many smaller placer mines. In
addition, a small amount of gold is recovered when mining silver
and when processing metals such as copper, lead, and zinc. The
U.S. exports gold, and in 2022 produced 170 metric tons, ranking
fifth after China, Russia, Australia, and Canada. About 98 percent
of the gold produced in the U.S. comes from only 28 mines.
Nevada was the leading gold-producing state, accounting for
about 72 percent of domestic production.
Gold is used mostly in jewelry, coins, and medals,
accounting for about 47 percent of global gold production.
Central banks and other institutions consume around 20
percent. Another 17 percent of gold production goes into
physical bars, and 9 percent goes into coins and medals. Gold
is a good conductor that does not corrode, making it reliable
for electronics and other electrical uses. These uses account for
6 percent of gold production. The remaining 1 percent goes into
medical, industrial and other uses.
Gold is so malleable that it can be pounded into extremely
thin sheets called gold leaf. Used mainly for decoration, gold
leaf adorns artwork, food (such as desserts), and even parts of
buildings. The domes of several state capitols are covered with
gold leaf; Colorado and West Virginia are examples.
Open-pit and placer mines are described in more detail
under “Types of Mining,” later in this pamphlet.


.Minerals and Rocks
Coal is found and mined in 25 states but mostly in Appalachia and Wyoming.


26 MINING IN SOCIETY
Minerals and Rocks.
Major Sources and Uses of Minerals
The following charts list minerals, their major sources, and their
main uses. Note how many mineral resources are mostly or
entirely mined outside the United States.
Metals
Metal (chemical
symbol)
Ore (Mineral or
Rock) or the host
mineral when
produced as a
byproduct
Major Sources Major Uses
Aluminum (Al) Bauxite, laterite
soils; (converted to
alumina first)
China, Brazil,
Indonesia
Lightweight metal
parts of all types
Antimony (Sb) Stibnite China Flame retardant, lead
alloys (batteries),
chemicals
Beryllium (Be) Beryl and bertrandite USA, China Electronics, defense
applications,
nonsparking tools
Chromium (Cr) Chromite South Africa,
Kazakhstan
Stainless steel,
electroplating
Cobalt (Co) Cobaltite Republic of
Congo, Zambia
Superalloys,
chemicals
Copper (Cu) Copper sulfides Chile, China,
Peru, USA
Electrical applications,
building construction
Gallium (Ga) From bauxite and
sphalerite
China,
Germany,
Kazakhstan,
Ukraine
Electronics
Gold (Au) Native metal in lode
and placer deposits
China, USA,
Australia,
Russia, South
Africa
Jewelry, dentistry,
electronics
Indium (In) From zinc ores China, Canada,
Japan, South
Korea
Liquid crystal displays
(LCDs)
Iron (Fe) Hematite and
magnetite
China,
Australia,
Brazil, India
Wrought iron, cast
iron, steel
Lead (Pb) Galena China,
Australia, USA
Lead-acid batteries,
bullets, ballast, glass


MINING IN SOCIETY 27
.Minerals and Rocks
Metal (chemical
symbol)
Ore (Mineral or
Rock) or the host
mineral when
produced as a
byproduct
Major Sources Major Uses
Lithium (Li) Igneous rock and
brine (salt) deposits
Australia, Chile,
China
Ceramics and glass,
batteries
Manganese (Mn) Pyrolusite South Africa,
USA, China,
Gabon
Steelmaking, pig iron
production
Molybdenum
(Mo)
Molybdenite, from
copper and tungsten
ores
China, USA,
Chile, Peru
Iron and steelmaking,
superalloys, lubricants
Nickel (Ni) Pentlandite, laterite
deposits
Philippines,
Indonesia,
Russia,
Australia,
Canada
Stainless steel,
superalloys
Palladium (Pd) Native metal in
alluvial deposits,
copper and
nickel ores
USA, South
Africa, Russia,
Zimbabwe,
Canada
Catalytic converters,
petroleum refining,
dentistry, jewelry
Platinum (Pt) Native metal in
alluvial deposits,
copper and
nickel ores
USA, South
Africa, Russia,
Zimbabwe,
Canada
Catalytic converters,
petroleum refining,
jewelry, laboratory
equipment
Silver (Ag) Ores of copper,
copper-nickel, lead,
and lead-zinc
Mexico, China,
Peru
Electronics, coins and
medals, photography
Tantalum (Ta) Tantalite, coltan ores Rwanda,
Mozambique
Electronic
components, alloys,
superalloys
Titanium (Ti) Rutile, ilmenite Australia,
South Africa,
Canada, China,
USA
White pigments,
welding rods, alloys,
airplane parts
Tungsten (W) Wolframite, scheelite China, Russia,
Canada
Tungsten carbide,
tungsten metal wire,
alloys
Zinc (Zn) Sphalerite China,
Australia, Peru,
USA
Galvanizing, zinc-
based alloys, brass
and bronze


28 MINING IN SOCIETY
Minerals and Rocks.
Industrial Minerals
Mineral Ore (Mineral
or Rock) Major Sources Major Uses
Barite Lead-zinc veins in
limestone, hot-
spring deposits,
and hematite ore
China, India, USA Drilling mud, filler
in paint and plastic
Bauxite Sedimentary rock
(lateritic soils)
USA, China, Brazil,
Indonesia
Production of
alumina and
aluminum,
abrasives,
ceramics, paper
Bromine Salt deposits and
seawater
Oceans, salt domes Flame retardants,
water purification
Diatomite Sedimentary rock USA, China,
Denmark, Japan
Filtration,
absorbents,
abrasives, fillers
and extenders
Dolomite Sedimentary rock China, India,
European Union, USA
Aggregates,
refractories, lime
Feldspar Igneous rock,
metamorphic rock,
and sedimentary
rock
Italy, Turkey, China Glassmaking,
ceramics, fillers in
paint, plastics and
rubber
Fluorite Veins associated
with lead-zinc,
barite, quartz, and
calcite
China, Mexico,
Mongolia
Hydrofluoric acid,
steelmaking,
glassmaking,
enamels
Gypsum Sedimentary
(evaporite) rock
China, Iran, Thailand,
Spain
Wallboard, plaster,
retardant in
cement, soil
amendment
Iodine Caliche, oil-field
brine, seaweed
(extracted from
seawater)
Chile, Japan, USA Medicine, catalysis
in plastics,
nutrition, liquid
crystal displays
Limestone Sedimentary rock China, India,
European Union, USA
Aggregates,
cement, dimension
stone, lime
Perlite Igneous (volcanic)
rock
USA, Greece, Turkey,
Japan
Construction
products, fillers,
horticultural, filter
aids
Phosphate Sedimentary rock China, USA,
Morocco, Russia
Fertilizer, animal
feed supplements,
food additives


MINING IN SOCIETY 29
.Minerals and Rocks
Mineral Ore (Mineral
or Rock) Major Sources Major Uses
Potash Sedimentary
(evaporite) rock
Canada, Russia,
Belarus, China
Fertilizer, chemicals
Quartz (silica) Sedimentary rock,
sand, and igneous
rock
China, Brazil, USA Computer chips,
sand, glassmaking,
ceramics, food
additives, gems
Salt Sedimentary
(evaporite) rock
China, USA,
Germany, India
Road deicing,
chemicals, food
processing and
additives, plastics
Sulfur Byproduct of
petroleum refining
and sulfide
mineral smelting
China, USA, Canada,
Saudi Arabia
Fertilizer, sulfuric
acid, petroleum
refining, metal
mining
Trona Sedimentary
(evaporite) rock
USA, Turkey Glassmaking,
chemicals, soaps
and detergents
Zeolites
(aluminum
silicate)
Igneous (volcanic)
rock and
sedimentary rock
China, South Korea,
Japan, Jordan,
Turkey
Laundry detergent,
water purification,
catalysts
Energy Minerals
Mineral Ore (Mineral
or Rock) Major Sources Major Uses
Coal Sedimentary
rock
China, USA, India, European
Union, Australia, South
Africa, Canada, Russia
Electricity
generation, coke,
chemicals
Lignite Sedimentary
rock
European Union, USA Electricity
generation
Peat Sedimentary
rock
European Union, Belarus,
Russia, Canada
Plant-growth
medium, filtration,
industrial
absorbent
Tar sands,
bitumen, oil
shale
Sedimentary
rock, sand,
clastics,
shale, clay
Canada, Venezuela, Russia,
Kazakhstan, USA, Nigeria,
Estonia, China, Brazil,
Germany, Australia, Israel,
Jordan, Morocco, Sweden,
Turkey, Thailand, Syria
Crude oil,
combustible gas,
asphalt
Uranium Uraninite and
pitchblende
Kazakhstan, Canada,
Australia, USA
Electricity
generation, military
projectiles, nuclear
weapons





MINING IN SOCIETY 31
.Exploring for Minerals
Exploring for Minerals
In mining, exploration is the search for a useful mineral that can
be extracted from Earth’s crust. When you think of exploration,
you might imagine an old-time prospector with a trusty mule.
With pick and shovel, the prospector would go off in search of
something valuable. One common method of exploration was to
find a place that had geology similar to a known ore deposit.
For example, in 1849 in California, prospectors who knew that
gold could be found in some streams would pan for gold there.
A prospector would follow the gold upstream, panning
every so often, seeking the “mother lode,” or major ore deposit.
When gold could no longer be found in the sediments, a pros-
pector would backtrack to locate where the gold was entering
the stream, narrowing the search. Traditionally, once the place
was found, the prospector would shout, “Eureka!”—Greek for,
“I found it!”
Modern Exploration Methods
Many old methods are still used, but today’s “professional pros-
pectors” have more high-tech ways of locating the right geologi-
cal conditions for the kind of deposit being sought. Modern-day
specialists include geologists, geochemists, mining engineers,
metallurgists (experts in metals), and logistics specialists
(experts in handling the details of an exploration venture).
Panning is a method of separating gold
from other particles. Small amounts of
gravel and sediment from the streambed
are put in the pan. The pan’s contents are
swirled gently, allowing lighter materials to
wash out of the pan. Heavier particles fall to
the pan’s bottom. Any gold will remain in
the bottom of the pan.


32 MINING IN SOCIETY
Exploring for Minerals.
In their planning, exploration teams often use remote
sensing. Using satellites and airplanes, the team collects and
processes data using different detection methods, from
photography to multispectral scanning. Some methods that use
laser technology even allow scientists to “see through” trees
and vegetation to the ground beneath.
Because we can’t see below Earth’s surface to identify
deposits underground, the team relies on geophysical methods
that measure differences in gravity, magnetism, radiation, and
electrical resistance. For shallow studies, the team may use
ground-penetrating radar. Seismic techniques give the team a
picture of underground rock formations, similar to how
earthquakes are located and measured.
Steps in Exploration
An exploration team always plans ahead. Team members first
read the scientific literature about the area and the type of
mineral deposit they are seeking. This research helps make the
most of valuable field time. The team determines what tools to
use for exploration. Basic tools used for geologic mapping and
sampling in the initial fieldwork include a sturdy field vest or
backpack, maps and GPS devices, a compass, a hat that
provides shade, a full canteen, good hiking boots, a jacket, eye
protection, a rock hammer, sample bags, a notebook and
writing instrument(s), a pocketknife, a dilute hydrochloric acid
solution, and sometimes a four-wheel-drive vehicle.
The team then sets a timetable for when the work will be
done and prepares a budget to determine how much the project
will cost. Good communications are essential so the team mem-
bers’ location, and when they plan to return, is always known.
Land ownership is an important consideration. The explora-
tion team needs to avoid trespassing (exploring on land without
authorization). Local government offices have records of land
ownership as well as information on who owns the mineral rights.
Mineral rights are
property rights
that allow the
owner to extract
minerals within an
area; they may be
separate from
surface property
ownership.
One basic method that has long been used is to conduct an assay. Just as
an 1849 California prospector might bring in a rock sample to have its
composition analyzed, so do modern prospectors. By a series of chemical
and physical tests, assaying reveals the elements of a rock sample. If an
element of value has a high enough concentration, then an exploration
program may follow. Some people choose exploration as a career because
much of it is done outdoors.


MINING IN SOCIETY 33
.Exploring for Minerals
Besides asking the surface owner(s) for permission to pros-
pect on a piece of land, the team may need to get permits from
local, state, or federal government agencies before exploration
on the ground begins. Typically, a team has specialists who find
out about land ownership and obtain the necessary permits.
Drilling and Imaging
If the fieldwork uncovers good signs
of valuable minerals, the next step may
be to drill core holes. This allows the
geologists to see underground.
Drilling also provides more
geochemical or geophysical data.
The exploration team enters all the
data collected into a computer,
constructing a geological model of the
mineral resource. With enough data, a
three-dimensional computer image can
be created to show what the mineral
deposit looks like underground.
The next phase of exploration involves additional drilling
of the mineral deposit. This helps determine the concentration
of an element or a compound, along with other characteristics
that allow it to be mined and processed. Once team members
know how big the deposit is and what the grade is, they
calculate the amount of the resource present. The resources
calculation estimates how much ore is in the deposit. If the
analysis is positive, then the next step is mine planning to see if
mining is feasible.
The Major Steps in Exploration
1. Library studies identify geological formations that may hold a mineral.
2. Remote sensing may help to identify places to send an exploration team.
3. Fieldwork planning is completed (obtaining permits, getting permission
to explore the site, etc.).
4. After geologic mapping and sampling, more tests, like drilling, may be necessary.
5. Field data is used to build a computer model of the mineral deposit.
6. If there is potential economic value, core drill sampling is done.
7. Enough data is collected to confirm the size and quality of the deposit.
8. If the deposit still has potential economic value, mine planning begins.
Mining software uses prospecting data to
build images of mineral deposits. This
“slice” through such a model provides a
3-D view.





MINING IN SOCIETY 35
.Mine Planning and Operations
Mine Planning and
Operations
If you’re preparing to write a report for school or take a hike,
your first step is to make a plan. You may plan by yourself, or
have help from friends and family. The same is true in organiz-
ing a mining operation. Mine planning is the realm of the min-
ing engineer, supported by geologists, metallurgists, and others.
Planning a new mine takes several steps as seen in this
illustration. The steps are all connected. For instance, mine
design and safety go hand-in-hand; land reclamation and mine
closure may occur at the same time.


36 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mine Planning and Operations.
Major Considerations
When identifying resources that could be mined, mining
engineers (with the geologist) review the site information and
analyze geographic, geologic, technical, and economic
information. As mining engineers calculate the resources that
are recoverable (obtainable), they evaluate all the advantages
and disadvantages of the mine site. This tells if it is feasible to
mine and process resources economically and legally. A
feasibility study completed at this point allows the mining
company, bank(s), or investor(s) to decide if the project is
worth their spending additional funds on it.
Resource control confirms own-
ership of land and minerals through
lease or purchase. If the mineral is
privately owned, surface and mineral
owners and the mining company
must all negotiate contract agree-
ments to build the mine and share
the profits.
When state or federal govern-
ments own the minerals in the
ground, a U.S. citizen or corporation
may stake a mining claim on land
over the mineral occurrence. A claim owner has the right to
possess and extract any minerals under the claim starting on
the date the claim was located. There are several kinds of
claims. Lode and placer claims are named for the type of min-
eral deposit under it. Mill site and tunnel site claims are neces-
sary to locate and erect mills and other structures for mineral
processing. We’ll use a lode claim on federal land to describe
how to locate a mining claim.
To locate a lode claim, you have to discover a valuable
mineral there. Next you erect claim posts at the point of discov-
ery and at each of the four corners of the claim. You then
attach a location notice at the discovery post. Posted informa-
tion typically includes the name of the claim, date of location,
county and state, description of the land by township and range
(see the Geology merit badge pamphlet), name and address of
the locator (you), and a map of the claim. You must record this
within 90 days with the U.S. Bureau of Land Management, the
agency that administers all land owned by the U.S. government.
You pay any filing fees at the time you record the claim.


MINING IN SOCIETY 37
.Mine Planning and Operations
Permitting a new mine can be a lengthy process, typically
five years or more. A mine plan must meet all government
rules, including local ordinances, to protect air, water, land, and
wildlife. Permits are needed in several categories, including:
• Mining • Zoning
• Reclamation • Safety
• Water discharge • Wastewater control
• Air emissions • Explosives material
handling and storage
Local, state, and federal agencies review and approve per-
mits. Interested people and groups can learn about the mine
plan and comment on it beforehand. Mine construction begins
once permits are approved and the mining company posts a
bond (a financial guarantee) to ensure that funds will be avail-
able for reclamation.
Infrastructure includes roads, water wells,
gas pipelines, buildings, and electric power
lines that are already there. In addition, mining
infrastructure needs to be built. The mine may
require haul roads; shafts; elevators; additional
power, fuel, and water utilities; office facilities;
showers and lockers for miners; warehouse and
maintenance buildings; material handling,
processing, disposal, and transportation
facilities; and drainage and sediment-control
systems (such as sediment ponds and ditches).
Parts of the existing infrastructure may be
unaffected, relocated, or mined around. Mine
infrastructure is built so that it doesn’t interfere
with mining operations. For example, processing
plants should not be constructed directly over
minable resources.
Different states may require additional information as
well as recording the claim with the county and state
where the claim is located. More information about
staking mining claims can be found at the Bureau of
Land Management website, blm.gov.
(See “Mining Resources” in this pamphlet.)


38 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mine Planning and Operations.
Mine design varies according to the mining method. Plans
for a surface mine take into account the shape of the pit, the
amount of material to be handled, and the sequence of mining.
Plans for an underground mine set the location of shafts,
slopes, entries, ventilation systems, and roof supports, and the
sequence of mining. Detailed plans and cost estimates deter-
mine whether a mine is economically feasible. The success or
failure of the mining operation often depends on the success of
the design phase.
Mine safety is an essential part of mine planning. Safe
conditions provide a place where miners want to work. See
“Health and Safety in Mines” in this pamphlet.
Mine closure and land reclamation shuts down the mine
and restores the site to a natural condition or to a useful
purpose. Former mine sites are reshaped and contoured so they
blend in with the surrounding area; restored sites are then
replanted with vegetation. Reclamation of underground mines
tends to be less involved because affected areas are smaller
than for surface mines. When government authorities declare
reclamation successful, it allows the release of bonds posted
before the mining started.
Long-term monitoring of a restored site is often necessary if
there is a special concern. Examples may include specific needs
for revegetation or perhaps erosion control.
Even after mining
begins, mine planning
doesn’t stop. Ongoing mine
planning can be short-term
or long-term. Short-term
planning typically covers
less than five years,
focusing on current mine
operations, production
goals, and economic
budgets. Long-term
planning extends more than
a year beyond current
mining activity. It provides
detailed plans for at least 10
years as well as general
plans for the life of the
mine.
For more about
land reclamation,
see “Sustainability
in Mining” later in
this pamphlet.


MINING IN SOCIETY 39
.Mine Planning and Operations
Types of Mining
The type of mine is determined by the size and
shape of the mineral deposit, how deep it is, and
the kind of rock that surrounds it.
Types of Mineral Deposits
The main types of mineral deposits include
tabular, massive, vein, and placer.
Tabular. The mineral deposit is basically
horizontal and fairly uniform in thickness, like
a slab or countertop. It can be at the surface or
thousands of feet below. Examples of minerals
found in tabular deposits are bituminous and
lignite coal, limestone, salt, and trona (sodium
carbonate or soda ash). Many tabular deposits
like coal, gypsum, and potash may have layers
of unwanted rock types in between.
Massive. The mineral deposit lies within a large
rock formation and is usually hundreds of feet
thick and thousands of feet wide. It can be at
the surface or thousands of feet below. Massive
mineral deposits include metals like gold, silver,
copper, lead, and zinc.
Vein. The mineral deposit is a narrow sheetlike
seam of mineral crystals within a host rock.
Veins come from crystal growth on the walls of
fractures in rocks. They usually are inclined
(tilted). Some minerals found in veins include
gold and silver. Steeply inclined anthracite
coal formations resemble vein deposits, but
they developed by folding and faulting tabular
deposits.
Placer. The deposit is an accumulation of
minerals in loose sand and gravel. Streambeds
and beaches are the usual sites for placers. They
are mined for gold, platinum, diamonds,
titanium, and uranium.
TABULAR
MASSIVE
VEIN
PLACER
PLACER
SAND WITH MINERALS
SURFACE
SURFACE
ROCK
VEIN
CRYSTALS
WITH MINERALS
ROCK
SURFACE
MINERAL DEPOSIT
MINERAL DEPOSIT
ROCK
SURFACE
OVERBURDEN


40 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mine Planning and Operations.
The majority of all
mined substances
are mined by
surface methods.
Tabular, massive,
and placer-type
deposits are
mined this way.
The mining engineer decides how to mine a mineral
deposit safely with the least environmental impact and at the
lowest cost. The type of mining depends on: 1. the material
being mined; 2. the location of the material; and 3. the shape of
the deposit. Surface mining is usually the first choice if the min-
eral deposit is at or near the surface. If it is deep below the sur-
face, then underground mining is required.
Surface Mines
In a surface mine, the unwanted material above the mineral
deposit is called the overburden. Mining starts when the
overburden is removed by blasting and excavating. Once the
mineral deposit is exposed, miners load the ore mineral into
haul trucks or conveyor belts to transport it to a mineral
processing plant.
Surface methods usually involve moving large amounts of
material at a relatively low cost per ton or per cubic yard. A
surface mine almost always appears larger than an underground
mine that produces the same mineral because all the mine-
works are visible. Underground mines can be the size of cities,
but are hidden from view. Many underground mines range up
to 24 square miles, as large as the island of Manhattan.
ROTARY BLAST-HOLE DRILL DOZER
ELECTRIC ROPE SHOVEL HYDRAULIC SHOVEL HAUL TRUCK
WHEEL LOADER
Types of equipment used in a surface mine


MINING IN SOCIETY 41
.Mine Planning and Operations
Surface Mining Equipment
Surface mining requires huge equipment. For example, the largest
bucket from a modern rubber-tire loader, used to excavate the blasted
minerals and rocks, can hold 53 cubic yards. That’s 160,000 pounds of
material, which is equal to the weight of about 40 pickup trucks.
EXAMPLES OF SURFACE MINES
Open-pit mine. This type of mine is typically used for massive
deposits close to the surface. A quarry is a common open-pit
mine. Quarries produce building materials such as sand, gravel,
and stone. Quarries are often located near populated areas
where the construction materials are used, so cooperation
between the mine and its neighbors is essential.
Notice the benches and roadways around the inside of Utah’s Bingham Canyon, an
open-pit copper mine. Bench design helps maintain the stability of the mine wall.
Haul roads are required to remove rock from the pit.


42 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mine Planning and Operations.
Strip mine. This type
of surface mining is
generally used for
tabular deposits. The
picture shows a strip
mine in a coal
deposit. Mine
planners carefully
design the angle of
the rock wall (above
the coal) so that it
does not fail during
mining.
TRANSPORT VEHICLE
BLAST-HOLE DRILL
Types of equipment used in an underground mine
Underground Mines
Underground mining is more selective in the way minerals are
extracted. Underground mines require careful designing and
planning with more structures than surface mines. The necessary
structures include shafts, hoists (elevators), ventilation fans,
underground maintenance shops, and conveyance (transport)
systems.
The geometry, or shape, of the deposit determines which
underground method to use. No two mineral deposits are
identical, so the mine design is customized to the size, shape,
and location of the deposit.
CONTINUOUS MINER


MINING IN SOCIETY 43
.Mine Planning and Operations
EXAMPLES OF UNDERGROUND MINES
Room and pillar. This mining
method extracts minerals (tabular
and massive) from a series of
“rooms” along horizontal openings.
Because part of the deposit is left
behind as support pillars to hold up
the mine roof, it is not the most effi-
cient method. Each pillar tends to be the
same size and shape for a particular mine,
forming a pattern like a checkerboard when
viewed from above. Room-and-pillar mining is
used to extract coal and metal ores, stone, talc,
soda ash, salt, and potash.
Longwall mining. In a longwall mine, a panel of coal or
trona, measuring about two miles long and 750
to 1,500 feet wide, is cut by shearers (or
plows) moving back and forth
along the mine face
(wall). Conveyors
bring the mineral to the
surface. Heavy-duty shields
protect the miners working
along the face and the shearing
edge itself. As the shields move for-
ward, overlying rock falls behind them
into the empty spaces that were just
mined. The fallen rock is known as gob.
Longwall mining
Most underground
mines in the United
States use the room-
and-pillar method.
DIRECTION OF MINING
COAL
COAL PILLARS
COAL
DIRECTION
OF MINING
CONVEYOR
BELT
COLLAPSED ROOF
MATERIAL
PILLARS SUPPORT
ROOF
LONGWALL
SHEARER CUTS
COAL FACE
PILLARS
SUPPORT
ROOF
CRUSHER
CONVEYOR
BELT


44 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mine Planning and Operations.
Block caving. This method mines large, low-grade ore bodies
that are vertical or slightly inclined (massive or veins). The ore
body is undercut (dug out from underneath), or undermined,
over a large area. Then it is drilled and blasted above the
undercut rock opening. The rock mass drops into draw bells
and is removed at loading draw points, then conveyed or
hoisted to the surface for processing.
Block caving
CUT-OFF
RISE
BROKEN
ORE
DRILLING
SUBLEVEL
UNDERCUT
SUBLEVEL
SLUSHER
DRIFT
PANEL
INSPECTION
RISE
MUCK PASS
TRANSFER RISE
TO HAULAGE
LEVEL


MINING IN SOCIETY 45
.Mine Planning and Operations
Stoping. Stoping is used when surrounding rock is strong
enough to prevent a cave-in of the stope, or open space. Vertical
shafts reach down to the ore body (massive or vein). Miners
remove the ore along horizontal levels, or tunnels. Stoping is
used to mine large deposits of gold, silver, lead, platinum,
molybdenum, and many minerals.
Stoping
RINGDRILLING,
LONGHOLES
RINGDRILLING,
DRAFT
STOPE
BLASTED ORE
DRAWPOINT
LOADING CROSS CUTS
TRANSPORT DRIFT
MANWAY
ORE
SUBLEVEL
SUBLEVEL


46 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mine Planning and Operations.
SURFACE SUBSIDENCE
When minerals are removed from underground mines, the
surface above may subside or sink. A room-and-pillar mine
generally has no subsidence on the surface, unless the pillars
fail after the mine closes. However, longwall or block caving
methods will—by design—cause surface subsidence. So
precautions are necessary to avoid mining under surface
structures (buildings, highways, etc.) and may call for a plan to
restore the surface structures after mining ends.
Many areas rely on groundwater for irrigation or drinking
water. When there is subsidence, the water supply can be
disrupted. In most cases, the interruption is temporary; in
others it is permanent.
IN-SITU RECOVERY AND SOLUTION MINING
In-situ recovery (ISR) and solution mining (SM) extract mineral
resources without traditional mining methods. Both methods
dissolve a mineral resource in place (underground), and then
process it at the surface. Copper, gold, uranium, and
lithium—even salt—are substances extracted by ISR and
SM. In 2016, ISR operations accounted for over 55
percent of all uranium mined worldwide.
It takes a unique combination of geologic
conditions to make these methods
possible. In the case of ISR, the
mineral deposit must be
highly permeable. Copper
deposits for example, must
be naturally fractured to
create high permeability.
Next, the mineral should be
leachable—capable of being removed
by a percolating liquid. Finally, the mineral
deposit must be below the water table. These
conditions rarely occur in nature, but when they do,
ISR is an option. SM uses only water as its leaching
liquid, therefore requiring the mineral to be water soluble—salt,
potash, and trona are examples. SM methods also extract
minerals from naturally occurring subterranean brine—iodine,
bromine, and salt are prominent examples.
In ISR and SM, a pattern of injection and recovery wells
penetrate the subterranean mineral deposit. Pumps deliver a
leaching solution into the deposit and retrieve the mineral
Mining companies
are required to
provide alternative
sources of water
if they are
responsible for
water loss or poor
water quality.
In ISR, once the
wells are sunk,
minerals can be
mined via the
process detailed
in the illustration
on page 47.


MINING IN SOCIETY 47
.Mine Planning and Operations
mixture at the surface. Extraction processes harvest the desired
mineral, and once the deposit yields all possible ore, the
wellfield is flushed with water. When processing natural brine,
recovery wells retrieve the brine, then injection wells return the
depleted brine back underground. Reclamation recycles process-
water and returns the surface to pre-mining conditions. In some
cases, SM converts resultant underground cavities into storage
facilities and other uses.
Advantages of in-situ mining are:
• Minimal noise, dust, or greenhouse gas emissions
• Minimal visual disturbance
• No open holes, waste piles, leach pads and tailing piles
• Lower capital and operating costs
Scouting America’s Summit Bechtel Reserve
The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve near New
River Gorge, West Virginia, was a mining site before reclamation
and conversion to Scouting America’s newest high-adventure
facility. The picture at right shows the SBR site as a 1900s
underground coal mine. This is a good example of how mine
reclamation returns mined land to other uses.





MINING IN SOCIETY 49
.Mineral Processing
Mineral Processing
Companies mine minerals to sell at a profit to customers who
need and demand them. However, most minerals cannot be sold
immediately after they are extracted, because customers can’t use
them in that form. Mineral processing gets the minerals ready for
the customers. Processing converts rock into a form that is
usable, transforming it into such things as a gold bar, or
separating it into different sizes for sand and gravel, or in the
case of coal, it’s cleaned to reduce pollution when it’s burned.
Mineral processing can be simple with only a few
transformation steps, or it can take many steps to release the
minerals or metals. Each step uses specialized tools and
equipment. The equipment used in modern mineral processing
is huge, highly automated, and worth millions of dollars.
Processing Methods
Separating and purifying an
ore into a useful product can
be difficult. In gold-bearing
ores, for example, the gold
particles may be microscopic.
Mineral processing engineers
have developed ways to
recover gold from ore with
grades as low as 0.01 ounce of
gold per ton. To put it another
way, a ball of gold ore 3 feet in
diameter would contain the
equivalent weight in gold of
only 10 Cheerios® (one-
hundredth of an ounce).
One responsibility of the mineral processing engineer and metallurgist is
devising methods to remove valuable minerals from the ore rock after it
is hauled out of the mine.


50 MINING IN SOCIETY
Rock Cutting
Dimension stone is natural stone or rock that is cut
to specific sizes or shapes. To make dimension stone,
diamond saws and wedges separate large blocks of
rock in quarries. The blocks are cut into smaller
pieces: from small slate roofing tiles and walkway
pavers to large rectangular slabs for granite kitchen
and bath countertops and marble monuments or
interior walls.


MINING IN SOCIETY 51
.Mineral Processing
Material Separation
To separate different sizes of materials,
screens are used. A mixture of sand and
gravel may be fed into a series of screens
to separate the various sizes. The fine
sand might be used in a sand trap on a
golf course, while the gravel could be
used to make concrete or road base.
Crushing and Grinding
When valuable minerals are only a small
percentage of the ore rock that is mined,
they must be liberated from the host rock. Many mineral process-
ing plants have equipment to break different sizes of rocks into
smaller ones. Large, heavy-duty crushers can reduce boulders the
size of an automobile. Some crushers pinch the rocks between
moving walls and fixed walls, much like a hammer and anvil.
Other kinds of crushers drop the rocks onto hard materials
or other rocks to break them. In coal processing, for example,
the coal is softer than the rocks, so the coal shatters. Rotary
breakers reduce the size of the coal, which passes through holes
in a drum. The larger rocks are rejected out one end.
After going through a crusher, rocks may be ground to a
fine powder using a
mill. A mill is a
cylinder or drum
filled with rock,
water, and steel balls
or rods. As it rotates,
the steel balls crush
and grind the rock
into tiny particles
making it possible
later to separate the
mineral from the
waste rock. Modern
grinding mills may be
up to 40 feet in
diameter, and use
30,000 horsepower. A
typical family car may
have only 200 hp. Crushed stone from primary crusher


52 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mineral Processing.
Grinding liberates individual mineral crystals in the ore
rock. This separates valuable minerals from waste minerals,
concentrating them in high purity form. Separation methods
take advantage of different physical and chemical properties of
distinctive minerals. For example, magnetic minerals, such as
magnetite, are easily separated from nonmagnetic minerals,
such as quartz, using magnetic separators.
Gravity separators
separate heavy,
dense minerals such
as gold from lighter
rock fragments. An
example of a simple
gravity separator
is the prospector’s
gold pan.


MINING IN SOCIETY 53
.Mineral Processing
Cyclone Separation
Coal removed from a mine is often contaminated
with rock and sulfur-bearing minerals, such as pyrite,
which are heavier (more dense) than coal. The coal
and rock are mixed with water to form a slurry,
which is swirled in a cyclone, a special type of
gravity separator. Lighter (less dense) coal is pulled
into the center vortex of the cyclone exiting out the
top while heavier rock flows out the bottom.
Flotation
In the flotation method, a chemical called a flotation
agent or conditioner coats tiny valuable mineral parti-
cles making them hydrophobic. Another chemical, a
frother, is mixed with a slurry of the tiny particles in
a large tank or flotation cell. The frother, like soap,
forms small air bubbles when the slurry is agitated. As the
bubbles rise, the hydrophobic mineral particles attach to
them. Mineral-rich bubbles are skimmed off when they
reach the top. Meanwhile, waste particles remain in
the slurry and flow out the bottom. In some cases
known as reverse flotation, the waste mineral is
floated while valuable mineral particles are removed
from the bottom of the flotation cell.
Other Chemical Processes
Some minerals can be chemically dissolved, then
recrystallized or precipitated into a highly pure solid
form. Examples include titanium dioxide used in
sunscreen to block ultraviolet radiation; sodium
carbonate used in baking soda; and table salt formed
by the evaporation of seawater. Some metal mines use
a technique called heap leaching to chemically dissolve and
separate valuable metals such as gold, copper, and silver from a
pile of crushed rock.
A cyclone separator
uses density to
separate coal from
waste (rock and pyrite).
Flotation cell
You can try the flotation method yourself. Throw some pea-
nuts and sand into water, and both will sink. If you mix the
peanuts and sand and drop them into a glass of carbon-
ated water (such as soda), you will see that the oily peanuts
attach to the gas bubbles (the oil acts as a flotation agent)
and float to the top, while the sand sinks to the bottom.
COAL
ROCK


54 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mineral Processing.
Smelting
Metal-containing minerals are concentrated by mineral
processing and shipped to a smelter where high temperatures
transform the metal-bearing mineral into pure metal. During
smelting a flux, such as limestone, is added to the molten
metal to combine with unwanted impurities called gangue.
The combined gangue and flux form slag that is separated from
the molten metal. The molten metal is then poured into a mold
to make very pure bars or ingots.
Smelting involves a chemical change to the raw
material, but in refining, the final material is usually
chemically identical to the original one, only purer.
The molten gold being poured here will soon become gold ingots.


MINING IN SOCIETY 55
.Mineral Processing
Refining
Refining is usually the last step in processing metals. After
smelting, a metal is dissolved in acid and electroplated
(deposited in a thin layer by electrolysis) as an almost pure
metal. In copper production, the copper coming from the
smelter may contain impurities such as arsenic. The copper is
dissolved in acid and then plated out in a way similar to how
a car battery works, by creating an electric current. The pure
copper is sold to make wire or other products.
Calcination
Another process of heat-treating rock or mineral is called
calcination. In one example, calcination is used to transform
calcite, the major component in limestone, into lime. (This
was mentioned in the “Rocks and Minerals” section). Gypsum
is calcined at 250 to 300 degrees Fahrenheit to remove the
water of crystallization as water vapor. Calcined gypsum is
called stucco.
Copper waiting to be manufactured


56 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mineral Processing.
Waste Products
After processing ore to recover valuable minerals, the leftover
materials are called refuse, gangue, or tailings. These must be
disposed of in an environmentally safe manner. Disposal facili-
ties are designed to hold all the waste generated during decades
of mining and processing plant operations.
Processing rocks and minerals is done in a plant that
houses all the equipment and has storage space for
ore, processed materials, and waste. Mineral process-
ing requires moving and storing large volumes of rock,
water, tailings, and finished products. Mineral process-
ing plants can look very complicated with all the tanks,
silos, conveyors, and pipes that transport materials
from one stage to the next.


MINING IN SOCIETY 57
.Mineral Processing
Georgius Agricola (1494–1555), a German scholar and scientist, is known
as “the father of mineralogy” and is considered the founder of geology
as a science. Agricola wrote on many subjects, including history and
paleontology (the study of ancient life forms; fossils) as well as metallurgy
and geology. His publications were based on his field observations.
His book De Re Metallica, published in 1556, was among the first and
most important books on mining and mineral extraction. While natural
resources had been obtained from Earth for thousands of years before
then, his was the first complete work on the subject. Agricola explained
and illustrated metal veins, exploration and surveying methods, and types
of mining machines. His explanation of water mills and water power was
especially important for its time—from crushing rocks to mine-shaft
ventilation to separating minerals by gravity—centuries before the use of
steam power. De Re Metallica championed the importance of metals in
human civilization, and it remains in print today, as evidence of its
timeless relevance.


Above: A digital rendition of robotic asteroid mining equipment.
Right: OSIRIS-REx, the first U.S. mission to collect a sample from an asteroid.


MINING IN SOCIETY 59
.Mining in the Future
Mining in the Future
In the future, mineral deposits most easily mined from Earth will
be depleted. Miners will need to dig deeper and work in more
challenging conditions to mine newly discovered deposits. Other
potential sources of minerals exist beyond these, however. It may
sound like science fiction to talk about mining the oceans or
interplanetary space, but we already harvest minerals from the
ocean. Also, detailed plans are in the works to mine the moon,
near-Earth asteroids, and even other planets.
Miners have many reasons to look beyond the usual places
for minerals. A mineral deposit in a remote location on Earth
might not have water, electrical power, roads, or workers
nearby, and the cost to install or obtain these might be
excessive. In addition, the grade might not be high enough; that
is, the mineral concentration might not be at the necessary level
to cover the cost of the machines and processes to mine it.
Also, an unfriendly country might control the only source of a
certain mineral, charging high prices for it or preventing others
from extracting it. Wars are sometimes fought over such
resources.
Finally, the environmental
cost of mining “the usual
places” may be too high in
terms of loss of species
(biodiversity), water and air
pollution, damage to Earth’s
natural landscapes, or any
combination of these.


60 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mining in the Future.
Mining the Ocean and Seabed
If you have ever tasted ocean water, you know how salty it is.
The ocean is Earth’s greatest storehouse of minerals. Besides
hydrogen and oxygen that make up water, the most abundant
elements in the ocean are sodium and chlorine, the elements
that form salt. While these elements come mostly from surface
erosion of the continental landmass, most sodium is leached
from the ocean floor and most chlorine is emitted from Earth’s
interior by volcanoes and hydrothermal vents.
Other abundant elements dissolved in seawater are magne-
sium, sulfur, calcium, potassium, carbon, bromine, boron,
strontium, and fluorine. Some are already mined from the
oceans. You are eating salt harvested from seawater if the pack-
age says “sea salt.” Common salt is obtained from seawater by
collecting it in ponds where the sun’s energy evaporates the
water. The salt is left behind as sodium chloride crystals and is
then harvested for consumption. Salt is used for seasoning and
preserving food. It is also used in water softening and for deic-
ing roads in wintertime.
Bromine, too, is extracted from
seawater. It is used in flame retar-
dants; water purification, particularly
in swimming pools and hot tubs;
pesticides; over-the-counter and pre-
scription drugs; and photography.
Iodine is mined from ocean
water by harvesting seaweed. Its dry
weight can have up to 0.45 percent
iodine. Iodine is essential for human
and animal thyroid function and
brain development. Without iodine
as a catalyst, or booster,
plastic drinking bottles would not be possible.
Other uses for iodine include pesticides,
medical applications, pharmaceuticals,
and stain-resistant chemicals.
Electrolysis
removes
magnesium metal
from seawater in
one step. The
magnesium forms
alloys with other
metals, especially
aluminum.
Seaweed


MINING IN SOCIETY 61
.Mining in the Future
The shallow near-shore realm concentrates some minerals.
Gravel for concrete and beach reconstruction is mined by dredg-
ing the sea bottom close to shore. Titanium dioxide is mined
along beaches and offshore sandbars as the minerals rutile, ana-
tase, leucoxene, and ilmenite. These are heavier than the rest of
the sand grains, so gravity processing easily separates them.
Deep-Sea Mining
Volcanic activity and hydrothermal vents on the ocean floor
yield iron, manganese, copper, cobalt, and zinc. Harvesting
these requires deep-sea mining methods. The crushing pressure
of the water, frigid temperatures, and total darkness are among
the challenges of deep-sea mining. New exploration methods
are needed—mobile exploration platforms for deep-sea drilling
and mapping, and remote sampling techniques. Remote-control
methods and robotics are likely answers to the challenges.
Some minerals might be scooped off the ocean bottom at a
depth of two to three miles (13,000 to 18,000 feet). Manganese
nodules, composed mostly of manganese and iron compounds,
might be mined this way. The nodules are valued for other met-
als they contain—copper, nickel, and cobalt.
For locating, sampling, and drilling these hard-to-reach
deposits, new approaches are necessary. How can these miner-
als be dug from the ocean floor? How can they be brought to
the surface? Can they be processed in factory ships or shipped
to processing plants onshore? What is to be done with leftover
materials after separating the desired metals?
These are questions that still must be
answered for a successful deep-sea
mining operation.
Diamonds and tin are also dredged from
shallow waters close to shore. Mining these
depends on dredging and gravity separation
that can handle large volumes of materials.
Manganese nodule
Uncut diamonds


62 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mining in the Future.
Protecting the Marine Environment
The environmental impacts of ocean mining must be considered before
launching any operations. Where unique marine habitats exist, mine
operations face restrictions.
• Seasonal limitations may be necessary to protect marine
organisms during special life stages such as breeding and egg or
embryo development.
• Dredging changes seabed topography which may need to be restored.
• Mining could displace certain bottom-dwellers. Miners will need to
consider how long it would take for these organisms to recover and
reestablish colonies.
• Miners will need to limit the amount of disturbed seafloor sediment
that increases cloudiness or turbidity (measure of light transmitted
through water).


MINING IN SOCIETY 63
.Mining in the Future
Mining in Space
Most of the Apollo astronauts were not
geologists, so they received extensive training in
geology before their moon missions. It was
essential for them to know about rocks before
they landed. Rocks would reveal how Earth and
the moon were similar and whether they shared
a common origin.
In 1972, the last moon mission landed a
geologist-astronaut on the lunar surface so that a
better geological assessment could be made.
Harrison H. “Jack” Schmitt, holder of a Ph.D.
in geology, could expertly judge the rocky terrain and quickly
saw the potential mineral wealth right at his feet. He later
proposed commercial ventures to mine lunar helium-3, which
could theoretically be used for fuel for nuclear fusion, replacing
nuclear fission and fossil fuels.
Developing such space enterprises would help to use
resources from space to support human space activities and
settlement, and help develop efficient and cost-effective ways to
launch large payloads from Earth into deep space.
Challenges of Space Mining
Mining methods in space would resemble those on Earth, but
adjusted for the absence of oxygen and differences in gravity.
Surface methods will be used when minerals are at or near the
surface. Devices will collect magnetic metals and minerals such
as those associated with iron meteorites. Underground shafts will
be dug when the target is a deep lode or vein. Space miners will
likely melt ice to get water and to generate oxygen for breathing.
For interplanetary mining, the equipment would have to be
shipped or manufactured in space on site, or shipped as parts
from Earth, then assembled on-site. Space mining poses major
transportation challenges at every stage that must yet be over-
come. Designs are on the drawing boards, however, for space
barges, space tugs, and power-generation systems.
Another issue is whether to process raw materials on-site,
ship them to mills on Earth, or transport them to mills on spe-
cially designed space stations. Interplanetary shipping of large,
bulky loads will be expensive, so processing on-site will proba-
bly be more cost-effective. This does not eliminate the problem,
since refined metals and maybe industrial minerals will have to
be shipped, too.
Iron, nickel,
platinum, and
cobalt are among
the valuable
elements that may
be mined from
asteroids or other
cosmic bodies.


64 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mining in the Future.
Hauling, crushing, and screening all depend on gravity
to some extent, so these steps need modification for smaller
cosmic bodies with less gravity. Enclosed circuits using
magnetic, electric, or pneumatic (air pressure) transport
may solve the problem, or previously unforeseen technology
may be developed. Flotation processes will face the similar
challenges of low gravity, limited water, and exposure to the
hazards of space.
Solar generators
or nuclear energy
could provide the
electrical power
necessary for all
the operations
needed in
space mining.
High cost is the main concern for any space operation.
Today it would take billions of dollars to explore, mine,
and ship mere ounces of materials to Earth. Instead of
bringing the minerals to Earth, space mining might best
be applied as what is called “in situ resource utiliza-
tion,” where materials are found, extracted, processed,
and used right at the site. Mined materials would be
used for constructing and maintaining space stations or
human settlements in near and deep space.
Even so, interplanetary mining remains an expensive
proposition. Only space-faring nations with the incentive
and economic means could plan such ventures.
An artist and space architect’s concept of a habitat on Mars.


MINING IN SOCIETY 65
.Mining in the Future
Mining Landfills
You are finished with an electronic device that no longer works
and is too costly to repair. Everything we use has a life expec-
tancy—the time when it becomes obsolete, it no longer per-
forms its intended function, or it isn’t needed anymore. The
item enters the waste stream: the flow of waste from its point of
origin through its treatment to its disposal. What we toss out
may end up in a sanitary landfill, waste incinerator, recycling
center, or open-air dump.
Many cities and towns have recycling programs. Most
people are familiar with curbside recycling—we put recyclable
household items (typically paper, plastics, glass, and aluminum)
in a bin and take them to the curb, and municipal sanitation
workers haul them to a recycling facility for sorting and
distribution. Some communities have recycling centers where
citizens drop off their recyclables. Once sorted and separated
into different categories, the recyclables can be used to make
new products.
Not all recycling centers accept electronic waste. Before you
decide to throw out any electronic devices, check the municipal
policy in your area. More and more centers now recycle
electronics, from cell phones and laptops to TVs and other
electronic devices. After sorting, the devices are dismantled and
processed. Many of them contain contaminants such as lead,
cadmium, and beryllium, which require special handling and
disposal or recycling. Many metals, such as gold, silver, platinum,
palladium, copper, tin, and zinc, can be recovered in recycling.
Glass and plastics also are recovered and recycled.
According to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
for every million cell phones recycled, we recover
35,274 pounds of copper, 772 pounds of silver, 75
pounds of gold, and 33 pounds of palladium.
Recovering these metals saves energy and reduces
the extraction of raw metals from Earth.


66 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mining in the Future.
These recycled materials—no longer destined for landfills
or incinerators—are recovered and used to create new products.
Garden furniture, license plate frames, nonfood containers,
replacement auto parts, art, and jewelry are among the many
types of goods produced from recycled materials. Rechargeable
batteries are recycled into other rechargeable battery products.
Recycling Electronic Goods
METALS PRECIOUS
METALS GLASS
PLASTICS CIRCUIT BOARDS
RECYCLABLE MATERIALS
“DEMANUFACTURING”—
DISMANTLING
SEPARATING
FERROUS (MAGNETIC)
FROM NONFERROUS
MATERIALS, EDDY
CURRENT SEPARATION PROCESSING—
SHREDDING AND
GRANULATING
COLLECTING
AND SORTING
COMPUTERS AND ELECTRONICS
BASE
METALS
PLASTIC
PELLETS
PROCESSED
GLASS


.Mining in the Future
Recycling Metals
Most metals remain usable even after the products that use
them have reached the end of their lifespan. Recycling metals
saves the energy that is used to separate them from their ores.
Also, the hauling of the recycled objects is usually shorter than
from distant mined sources, further saving energy and the
materials used in mining.
Typically called scrap metal, recycled metal is categorized
as either new or old scrap. New scrap comes from pre-consumer
sources generated from the manufacturing of different products.
Some gold, for example, is wasted unintention-
ally in the production of jewelry.
The unused waste gold still has
value, so the jewelry maker
sells it to a scrap dealer.
That way the unused
gold is reintroduced
into the jewelry-
making business.
Worldwide demand for metals grows steadily at 1 to 3
percent annually. Even this apparently slow growth rate
means additions must continually be made to the metal
supply. New supplies come from new mine develop-
ments, expansions of existing operations, increased
recycling, or all three.
It’s always best to recycle whatever
you can. Most Americans know the
expression “Reduce, Reuse, Recycle,”
but do most of us really do that?


68 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mining in the Future.
Old scrap comes from post-consumer
supplies generated when an item has
reached the end of its usefulness. Cast-off
jewelry, dental gold (gold teeth), and the
gold components of unwanted electronics are good
examples of old-scrap gold. Copper is another
commonly recycled metal. A third or more of annual
consumption comes from recycled scrap copper.
Other metals typically
recycled at scrap yards
include aluminum, brass,
lead, silver, platinum, iron,
steel, and zinc. Most of
these are recycled by man-
ufacturers as new scrap.
Much of the old scrap is
rescued from the waste
stream and recycled by
individuals committed to
salvaging such materials.
We are able to account for about 85 percent of all
the gold ever mined. About 15 percent is lost,
mainly in electronics because the amount
of gold in each device is too tiny to be
recovered economically. The rest
of the world’s mined gold is
held as heirloom jewelry,
coins, and gold bullion (bars
or ingots).
Recycling one aluminum can saves enough
energy to run a TV for three hours.
Source: Can Manufacturers Institute


MINING IN SOCIETY 69
.Mining in the Future
“Recycling” Landfills
Except for the items that people conscientiously recycle and
reuse, the vast majority of material entering the waste stream is
picked up as municipal waste and placed in sanitary landfills.
Waste in landfills is buried between layers of earth and isolated
from the environment until it breaks down biologically,
chemically, and physically.
Mining municipal landfills will require special skills and
techniques to protect air, water, and soil from contamination.
Care will be needed to restore or reclaim the sites for uses such
as farming, forestry, recreation (golf courses, public parks, zoos,
ball fields, etc.), or industrial parks for factories and
other businesses.
Most of the consumer waste in landfills still has value. How could we
recycle everything? Organics (substances of plant or animal origin) could
serve as compost and be used as fuel. Solids such as plastics could
become fuels or the basis for new products. Glass could be recycled for
new glass or energy-saving insulation. One innovation is to use glass
fibers with cement to form a stronger type of concrete.
Sanitary landfills will probably be one source of
minerals in the future. Metals and other materials
could be extracted from them, processed, and refined
for reuse.


HARD HAT
HEARING PRO-
TECTION
METHANE
DETECTOR
BATTERY
FOR LIGHT
STEEL-TOED
BOOTS
ANKLE STRAP
SNUG COVERALLS
SELF RESCUER
GLOVES
REFLECTION TAPE
LIGHT
SAFETY GOGGLES


MINING IN SOCIETY 71
.Health and Safety in Mines
Health and Safety
in Mines
At one time, mining was the most dangerous occupation
in the United States. Improvements in mining engineering,
education and training, government regulation, and industry
leadership together with decreasing community tolerance for
mining incidents have led to a significant reduction in
mining incidents and disasters. Today, mining is among the
safest industries as measured by nonfatal injury rates (see
chart below).
2021 nonfatal occupational injury and illness rates for the private-sector industry
Agriculture
Excludes farms with
fewer than 11 employees
Manufacturing
Construction
Utilities
Mining
Private Industry
5.0
4.0
3.0
2.0
1.0
0.0
Incident Rate Per 100 Full-Time Workers
Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics
2.7
4.6
3.3
2.5
1.7
1.3


72 MINING IN SOCIETY
Health and Safety in Mines.
Making mines healthier and safer places to work is the
responsibility of everyone involved—mine owners and workers,
federal and state government regulators, equipment
manufacturers and material suppliers, trainers and educators.
Operating a safe mine requires careful planning to ensure that
all facets of mining—production, processing, maintenance,
training, emergency response, etc.—follow all applicable laws
and regulations. The U.S. Mine Safety and Health
Administration (MSHA) and state agencies enforce mine health
and safety laws and regulations.
The industry strives continually to improve safety. Many
companies working with the National Mining Association have
launched the CORESafety program to do just that. It plans to
optimize mine safety by improving mine engineering, work
processes, and working conditions.
Tools for Mine Health and Safety
It is difficult to eliminate all risk from mining, so the focus is on
managing risk at an acceptable level—for miners, management,
government, and society. Some tools and techniques used in
American mines to this end include hazard identification and risk
assessment, personal protective equipment, environmental moni-
toring, and the introduction of automation for mining equipment.
Hazard Identification and Risk Assessment
“Being prepared” in mining means to anticipate and understand
mine risks. What is the likelihood that something will go wrong,
and what is likely to happen if it does? Examples include the
potential for gas or dust explosions in underground coal mines,
mine wall collapses, fires, and equipment striking a miner.
Experts believe it is more effective to eliminate hazards
where they occur. An example is using roof bolts to prevent
roof fall accidents by holding up an underground mine
roof. Steel rods, 4 to 16 feet long, anchor the roof
rock in place. Ventilation systems help ensure air
quality. When coal rock releases flammable
methane gas, ventilation dilutes its
concentration. Large fans on the surface and
auxiliary fans inside the mine provide
ventilation throughout underground tunnels
and shafts to accomplish this.


MINING IN SOCIETY 73
.Health and Safety in Mines
Personal Protective Equipment
Miners wear personal protective equipment to guard against
injury. A hard hat protects the head; safety glasses protect eyes;
earplugs or earmuffs minimize exposure to noise; gloves
protect hands; and hard-toed boots minimize the risk of foot
injury from impact, slip/trip, pinch, heat and cold, etc. Where
needed, respirators protect against inhaling harmful dust,
fumes, or gases.
Environmental Monitoring Technology
Different instruments, often handheld devices, detect harmful
and flammable gases, dust, fumes, noise, or radiation, and
ensure that adequate oxygen is present. Some monitor many
gases at the same time. Others measure airflow in the
ventilation system.
Instruments may be stationary or attached to
mobile equipment. They measure environmental
factors—such as carbon monoxide levels—in the
mine, relying on telemetry (wireless
communication) to send data to central
control stations. Computers monitor
ventilation fans in underground mines.
Other devices track the position of miners so
that mobile equipment doesn’t run into them.
Detection systems warn miners of any
developing fire. Alarms announce the need to
take action. It may mean to evacuate the
mine or, in an underground mine, to
seek shelter in a refuge chamber.
GPS networks help surface mines
pinpoint equipment and help
isolate hazards as they occur.
Underground miners carry a “self-rescue device” for
protection from smoke and toxic gases, such as carbon
monoxide, when escaping in the event of fire or
explosion.


74 MINING IN SOCIETY
Health and Safety in Mines.
Remote Control and Automation
Computer technology has radically improved mine safety and
health. Many mining machines are remotely controlled to keep
the miner from exposure to moving parts, dust, noise, unstable
ground, etc. The introduction of robotics is helping miners
reduce exposure to unnecessary risks. Some surface mines now
use haul trucks that run without a driver, using satellite naviga-
tion and robotics.
Automated mining operations can be monitored from safe, clean
control rooms like this, reducing unnecessary risks for operators.
Automation and robotics will increasingly be used as
mines become less accessible to human miners.
Applications include very thin or very deep deposits.


MINING IN SOCIETY 75
.Health and Safety in Mines
Mines & Quarries— Keep Out!
Mines and quarries are not like caverns open to the public for tours and
recreation. Every year accidents on mine properties injure or kill dozens of
people. Active mines are dangerous even for highly trained workers, and
are regularly inspected for hazardous conditions. Active sites hold many
risks to unaccompanied visitors—entering them without permission is
considered trespassing.
Because abandoned mine properties are not inspected, they pose
even greater hazards. Toxic, or explosive gases may be there if not
properly ventilated. Tripping and falling is common, as abandoned mines
are unlit with no guardrails: unseen vertical mine shafts may extend
hundreds of feet into lower levels of the mine. And cave-ins can result
from missing or deteriorating support structures.
Other dangers include discarded explosives which can become unstable
and explode, and toxic chemicals which may leak from old containers. Deep
bodies of water in mines are unsafe for drinking or swimming, and
potentially laden with poisonous chemicals. Wild animals often inhabit
abandoned mines, too, and they might not react kindly to intrusion!
Above ground, diving into quarry ponds is extremely risky as water
depth can vary greatly. And you may not see disposed equipment and
cables below the surface. If you encounter them underwater, you could get
entangled or seriously injured.
Finally, riding dirt bikes and four-wheelers, hiking, or otherwise
trespassing on mine property is dangerous and illegal. Unmarked high
walls, steep cliffs and unseen shafts pose major hazards.
Learning More About Staying Safe
“Stay Out – Stay Alive” is a partnership of federal and state agencies,
private groups, and businesses around the country that educate citizens
about risks in abandoned mines. Go to AbandonedMines.gov, managed by
the Bureau of Land Management, for more information.
Find out if your state mining agency or other organization has a
public-awareness program to warn people about the dangers in
abandoned mine sites and quarries. The Mine Safety and Health
Administration (MSHA) maintains a list of state mining agencies on its
web site, MSHA.gov. Check there, or with your state’s department of public
safety, for more information.


Scouting America’s Summit Bechtel Family National Scout Reserve in West
Virginia has successfully been reclaimed and converted from an underground
coal mining site to a recreational area enjoyed by thousands.


MINING IN SOCIETY 77
.Sustainability in Mining
Sustainability in Mining
Sustainability relates to harvesting resources in ways that do
not squander them or permanently damage the environment. A
sustainable lifestyle or society meets today’s needs without
using up natural resources for future generations.
Mining in Society
By now, you know how important mining is in our society. You
have learned the old saying of miners: “If it can’t be grown, it
has to be mined.” Mining provides, directly or indirectly, many
of the raw materials needed to sustain life and maintain civili-
zation. Unlike raw materials that are grown, the products of
mining are not renewable. The mineral resources available to us
are limited by our ingenuity to find and recover them safely.
Renewable resources can be replenished or replaced
over time and measured in human terms, such as within
generations. An example is growing new trees for
lumber after harvesting the site by logging.
Metallic, most forms of energy, and industrial
minerals, however, are nonrenewable resources. They
cannot be replenished at rates that match human
timeframes. Minerals require vast stretches of geologic
time to concentrate them in deposits suitable for mining.
Mining directly affects the natural environment while
working to meet the needs of a modern global economy. In this
way, the job of mining is unique. The industry must find and
extract mineral resources, while keeping in mind that sustain-
ability calls for meeting the needs of future generations and
conserving the environment. That means balancing the demand
for products and materials with good stewardship of the land.
Recycling is a
way to make
minerals “partially
renewable.”


78 MINING IN SOCIETY
Sustainability in Mining.
When it comes to sustainability, most mining operations
face these challenges:
• Dwindling mineral resources have forced operations to move
nearer to areas that are environmentally or culturally sensi-
tive, or more densely populated.
• Population growth has moved people closer to existing min-
ing operations.
• New mineral resources tend to be found in remote locations,
often in undeveloped countries.
• Greater environmental awareness among the public, elected
officials, and the media have brought mining operations
under closer scrutiny.
A Framework for Sustainability
The Sustainability merit badge pamphlet shows a model of the
three P’s—people, prosperity, and the planet—tied to the three
E’s—equity (fairness), economy, and environment. In mining, a
fourth ethical component—governance, or safety—can be
added to the mix. Each essential element depends on the other.
Improvements in one area often come at the expense of
another. Consider each element in the framework and how the
elements interact.
People and Community
A mining company is made up of people—its workers, as well
as its customers and neighboring communities. Responsible
companies recognize community (people) priorities while plan-
ning, when mining, and during reclamation.
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency was formed in
1970. Scouting America introduced the Environmental
Science merit badge in 1972 to teach Scouts about
conservation and care of the environment. In 1977,
Congress passed the Surface Mining Control and
Reclamation Act to regulate the environmental impacts of
mining. In 1983, the United Nations appointed the World
Commission on Environment and Development to unite
member countries in pursuing sustainable development.
For more about
sustainability and
renewable
resources, see
the Sustainability
merit badge
pamphlet.


MINING IN SOCIETY 79
.Sustainability in Mining
For example, when planning a new coal mine in southwest
Pennsylvania, the mine company met with more than 200 citi-
zen groups to explain how the mine would be a good neighbor.
In another instance, the geologist for a new stone quarry near
Washington, D.C., explained the geology and rocks to 20,000
second-graders. Through them, he reached their parents, who
initially opposed the mine. As a result, local opposition ended
18 months later. Treating people fairly is important to maintain-
ing a positive footing.
Planet and Environment
Earth provides essential resources for life. Without air to
breathe, food to eat, and water to drink, we would not survive.
Other resources add convenience and comfort to our lives. As
our quality of life improves, few of us would want to go back to
the way things were before we had cars, paved roads, electric-
ity, indoor plumbing, and cell phones.
Sustainability and mining
SUSTAINABILITY
PEOPLE
EQUITY
PLANET
ENVIRONMENT
GOVERNANCE
SAFETY
PROSPERITY
ECONOMY


80 MINING IN SOCIETY
Sustainability in Mining.
Mineral resources can be wasted by poor mining methods.
Responsible companies respect the environment by using and
producing resources wisely. They take into account environ-
mental impacts in each stage of the mine’s life.
Water and air used by mineral processing operations are
subject to strict environmental regulation. The goal is to reduce
the effects of mining operations to balance the benefits that
society receives from the mined resources. Mineral processing
plants treat water to remove solid or dissolved substances
before releasing water into the environment. Water is treated so
that it is not cloudy; it has a neutral pH (not acidic or basic);
and impurities are below natural levels of local streams. Other
equipment removes dust, toxic gases, and other compounds to
prevent them from entering surrounding air.
Interactions
People, businesses, and the environment
are all essential parts of sustainability;
they interact. Responsible mining com-
panies recognize these interactions and
know how to be good neighbors and
stewards of the land. As a Scout, think
about how you can make a difference
through the Scout Law and principles of
sustainability. Consider these examples
of how a Scout is:
Trustworthy. Sustainability starts with
you. As a young leader, you can help
by recycling and by advocating low-
impact solutions to everyday issues.
Loyal. Demonstrate sustainability
by reminding others how we share
limited resources.
Helpful. Make a difference in your fam-
ily and community—and help our
world—by using only what you need.
Clean. Respect our world and the
valuable resources we consume every
day. Set an example by disposing of all
waste properly, using less, and protect-
ing resources more.


MINING IN SOCIETY 81
.Sustainability in Mining
Mine Land Reclamation
Mine land reclamation is a part of sustainability. Before mining
begins, the condition of the land is assessed. Land use, water-
sheds, topography, and wildlife habitat are considered. The future
effect of mining on each is determined, and plans are made to
restore the land. One goal of mine land reclamation is to return
the land to as good or better condition than it was before mining
began. In this way, reclamation is similar to Scouting’s Leave No
Trace Seven Principles and the Outdoor Code.
Oftentimes land uses change after mining. The goal is to
prepare the land for better use. For example, the King Coal
Highway being built across southern West Virginia links surface
mine reclamation sites together to complete the construction of
the highway. When mining is finished, the highway will need
only the road surface constructed, saving millions of dollars.
Land reclaimed for recreational use


82 MINING IN SOCIETY
Sustainability in Mining.
To restore mine land or
improve the land to benefi-
cial use, steps are taken to
preserve qualities that have
special value, such as topsoil
and vegetation. Reclamation
begins with stockpiling top-
soil. Then the topsoil is
planted with native vegeta-
tion to help prevent erosion
of the stockpile and preserve
native plant species. This
topsoil is then spread over
the disturbed land when
mining ends.
The mining industry
takes mine land reclamation
and restoration seriously.
The industry sees how stew-
ardship of the land, from
which it draws its livelihood
and wealth, adds great value
to communities. It also helps
enrich the public’s under-
standing of the reclamation
and restoration process.
Land reclaimed
for use as
an airport
Mine reclamation efforts in progress
Land reclaimed for commercial and residential use


MINING IN SOCIETY 83
.Sustainability in Mining





MINING IN SOCIETY 85
.Careers in Mining
Careers in Mining
When most people think about what a
miner does, the first image that springs
to mind is the miner heading under-
ground with a headlamp, hardhat, sim-
ple tools, and a lunch pail. Or you may
think about the shovel operator, haul-
truck driver, or someone working a
bulldozer or front-end loader. These
images have triggered the imaginations
of artists and writers who have passed
them down to us over time.
A career in the mining industry
includes many more occupations
than these. The cycle of developing
mineral resources has many parts,
and all offer interesting, well-paying
career opportunities.
Mine workers take satisfaction in
knowing they provide essential miner-
als and fuels that benefit society.
Discovering and providing the minerals
that increase our standard of living,
minimizing environmental impacts,
and contributing to a safe work situa-
tion are all benefits of a mining career.
A mining career offers the prospect of
travel, the challenge of working with
advanced technology, and the opportu-
nity for career advancement with
increased responsibilities.
This illustration shows the sequence of events in mining and related careers.
Source: Mineral Resources Education Program of British Columbia
Available land
resources
Exploration
(8 to 10+ years)
Environmental assess-
ment and approval
(ongoing stakeholder
consultations)
Construction
(1 to 3 years)
Geologists, mineral
resource experts,
land specialists
Geologists and geo-
physicists, remote
sensing experts,
geochemists
and chemists
Hydrologists,
engineers
(environmental,
mining), permitting
experts
Engineers (mining,
electrical,
metallurgical, civil,
environmental),
equipment operators
and mechanics,
hydrologists, health
and safety specialists,
geologists
Ergonomists,
hydrologists
Operation
(10 to 30 years)
Closure
(1 to 2 years)
Reclamation
(1 to 4 years) and
monitoring (5 years
or perpetually)
Engineers (mining,
civil, environmental),
equipment operators
and mechanics,
hydrologists


86 MINING IN SOCIETY
Careers in Mining.
Mining Personnel
Some positions in mining are paid hourly. People working in the
mine itself are mostly equipment operators. Those working at a
surface mine include drillers and blasters; dragline, shovel, and
excavator operators; front-end loader and bulldozer operators;
haul-truck drivers; and support personnel. In an underground
mine, workers operate cutting machines, shuttle cars, roof bolt-
ers, scoops, longwall shearers, jumbo drills, loaders, haul trucks,
belt conveyors, trains, and other mobile equipment.
An operating mine
might be in a
remote location,
along with the
operations office
and any
connected
processing plant.
The division
offices and
company
headquarters,
however, or
technical support
are generally
located in a large
town or city.
The workers at a processing plant operate equipment for crushing and
screening; physical and chemical procedures, especially in metal mines;
haulage and mobile equipment; lab work; mapping and surveying; and
other tasks. These are supported by software specialists, mechanics, welders,
machinists, electricians, general laborers, and equipment manufacturers.


MINING IN SOCIETY 87
.Careers in Mining
Technical Personnel
The minimum educational requirement for technical workers
typically is a high school diploma. An associate degree or trade
school education will help the worker meet requirements for
positions of greater responsibility and higher pay. An example is
the electrical certification required for an underground electri-
cian, who is paid more than a typical laborer in a coal mine.
Underground professionals tend to earn more than their coun-
terparts in surface mining. Many trade skills are obtained
through programs provided by the mining company in combi-
nation with on-the-job training or community colleges.
John Llewellyn Lewis
(1880–1969) was an
American leader of
organized labor. From
1920 to 1960 he served as
president of the United
Mine Workers of America.
He also worked to establish
the Congress of Industrial
Organizations, organizing
millions of industrial
workers in the 1930s.
Under his leadership, coal
miners won high wages, an eight-hour work day, good
pensions, and good medical benefits.
The creation of the UMWA Welfare and Retirement
Fund was perhaps his greatest legacy. The fund helped
establish eight regional hospitals and many medical
clinics in Appalachian coal country. In 1964, President
Lyndon Johnson awarded Lewis the Presidential Medal
of Freedom, the highest civilian decoration in the
country, recognizing his many contributions to the
labor movement.


88 MINING IN SOCIETY
Careers in Mining.
Professional Personnel
Many different kinds of profes-
sionals are needed to explore for
minerals and to mine them; to
plan new operations; or to man-
age a mine. Mining professionals
include geologists, mining and
geological engineers, metallur-
gists, civil engineers, mine
managers, and environmental
specialists. These positions
require a college degree, and in
some cases, graduate degrees.
Professional personnel eval-
uate the mineral or ore deposit
for its economic potential. They
create mining plans based on
those evaluations. Scientists
and engineers work together to
plan and build the processing
plant(s) needed to treat the ore
or rocks after they are hauled
out of the mine.


MINING IN SOCIETY 89
.Careers in Mining
Careers Supporting the Mining Industry
Equipment manufacturers and service companies support the
mining industry, too. A wide variety of products is delivered to
mines, ranging from office supplies to explosives, to heavy
equipment. Service companies may provide security for the
mine site; workers for short-term maintenance positions such as
welders, mechanics, and electricians; and consulting engineers
for almost every aspect of mining and processing.
There are careers in regulating the mining industry on
local, state, or federal levels. These include health and safety
inspectors, reclamation and water quality technicians and
inspectors, and environmental quality experts.
It takes many thousands of people to mine all the min-
erals and fuels we rely on and use. Mining provides
above-average income to miners; pays taxes to local,
state, and federal governments; and often works with
local communities to improve the quality of life for
its neighbors.
Herbert Clark Hoover (1874–1964), was a mining
engineer and scholar before he became the
31st president of the United States (1929–1933).
His mining career began in 1897, in the gold
fields of Western Australia. He later traveled to
the Far East, where he worked for the Chinese
Bureau of Mines as chief engineer and then as
general manager of the Chinese Engineering
and Mining Corporation. Hoover became an
independent mining consultant in 1908, setting
up offices worldwide. His mining ventures
brought him wealth, but he was also famous as
a published scholar. For example, he and his wife, Lou, were responsible
for translating Agricola’s De Re Metallica, which remains in print today.





MINING IN SOCIETY 91
.Mining Resources
Scouting Literature
Archaeology, Composite Materials,
Energy, Engineering, Environmental
Science, Geology, Surveying, and
Sustainability merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Cumming, John, ed. Mining
Explained, 11th ed. The Northern
Miner, 2012.
Lagomarsino, James. The Ultimate
Guide to Rocks and Minerals.
Parragon Books Ltd., 2011.
Prinz, Martin, George Harlow,
and Joseph Peters, eds. Simon
and Schuster’s Guide to Rocks
and Minerals. Simon and
Schuster Inc., 1978.
Industry Organizations
American Exploration & Mining
Association
miningamerica.org
National Mining Association
nma.org
Society for Mining, Metallurgy,
and Exploration
smenet.org
Web-Based Resources
Ground Rules—Caterpillar Inc.
youtube.com/catgroundrules
Mineralogical Society of America
min4kids.org
Minerals Education Coalition
mineralseducationcoalition.org
NASA STEM Engagement
nasa.gov/stem
USGS National Minerals Information
Center
usgs.gov/centers/nmic
USGS Mineral Resources Program
usgs.gov/energy-and-minerals/
mineral-resources-program
Mining Resources


92 MINING IN SOCIETY
Mining Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to staff
members of the Society for Mining,
Metallurgy, and Exploration, who so
graciously gave of their time, expertise,
and other resources to assist us with
the Mining in Society merit badge and
pamphlet.
Revision Team (2023): Stan Krukowski
(chair), Oklahoma Geological Survey
(retired); Dan Alexander, West Virginia
University; Joe Hirschi, Southern
Illinois University; Pam Wilkinson,
University of Arizona; Charlie
Zimmerman, Caterpillar Inc.
Content Development Team
(2014): Stan Krukowski (co-chair),
Oklahoma Geological Survey; Bob
Pruett (co-chair), Imerys; Eric
Berkhimer, Golder Associates; Scott
Ferrin, SHRM; Bill Francart, MSHA;
Thomas Hethmon, University of Utah;
Joe Hirschi, Southern Illinois
University; Steve Richards, Carlson
Software; Shane Spor, Barrick Gold.
Mining in Society Advisory Panel
(2014): John Murphy (chair),
University of Pittsburgh; Dan
Alexander, West Virginia University;
Rick Derry, BLM; Mark Jorgensen,
CH2M Hill Inc.; Frank McAllister,
Retired mining executive; Robert
Robinson, Shannon & Wilson; Brian
Shaffer, Alpha Natural Resources.
Special thanks to the following for
their tremendous support: Frank
McAllister; Bill Francart; Stan Perks;
Dave Kanagy, Executive Director, SME;
Rio Tinto Kennecott Utah Copper;
Aaron Young; the students and faculty
of Department of Mining Engineering,
University of Utah; the SME Student
Chapter, CONSOL Energy; WAAIME;
and the many members of SME not
listed here.
The Society for Mining, Metallurgy &
Exploration (SME) and the Minerals
Education Coalition (MEC) worked with
Scouting America to develop the Mining
in Society merit badge, including the
requirements, pamphlet, badge design, and
other materials. In our ongoing efforts
to help Scouts learn about the mining
industry and its impact on their lives, we’re
pleased to provide a resource page for those earning the badge, their
merit badge counselors, and others:
mineralseducationcoalition.org/scouts
Have questions? Contact us at mec@smenet.org


MINING IN SOCIETY 93
.Mining Resources
Photo and Illustration Credits
Caterpillar Inc., courtesy—pages 40, 42
(dragline), 43, 74 and 95
Deep Space Industries/Bradford Space,
courtesy—page 58
Edumine, courtesy—page 42 (blast-hole
drill)
Joy Global, courtesy—pages 42
(continuous miner, transport vehicle)
Herbert Hoover Presidential Library and
Museum, courtesy—page 89
Kentucky Coal and Energy Education
Project, courtesy—pages 81 and 82
(lands reclaimed for recreational use
and for commercial and residential
use)
Library of Congress, courtesy—page 30
(mining town)
Library of Congress, Lawrence &
Houseworth Collection, courtesy—
page 15 (mining town)
Library of Congress Prints and
Photographs Division, courtesy—
page 87
©2007 MC Process Ltd., courtesy—page
51 (screening)
Mine Safety and Health Administration,
courtesy—pages 21 and 75 (Stay
Out—Stay Alive)
Minerals Education Coalition,courtesy—
page 12
NASA, courtesy—pages 59 and 63
National Institute of Occupational
Safety and Health, courtesy—
page 86
Photos.com—pages 14 (arrowhead,
clay pots) and 15 (sword at left)
Society for Mining, Metallurgy &
Exploration, courtesy—page 92
(logos)
U.S. Bureau of Land Reclamation,
courtesy—page 83 (both)
Visual Capitalist, courtesy—pages 46
and 47
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—page 57
(both)
Wikipedia.org/Dhatfield, courtesy—
page 53 (flotation cell)
Wikipedia.org/Luis García, courtesy—
page 15 (sword at right)
Wikipedia.org/David Monniaux,
courtesy—page 14 (Bronze Age
cape)
Wikipedia.org/Spencer Musick,
courtesy—page 41
Wikpedia.org/Thors, courtesy—page 16
Sam Ximenes, space architect, XArc
Exploration Architecture Corp
—page 64
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting
America.
John McDearmon—illustrations on
pages 11, 17, 25, 33, 39 (all), 43
(both), 44, 45, 53 (bottom), 66
(jar), 70, and 85


94 MINING IN SOCIETY
Notes.


An autonomous mining haul truck designed to improve safety on mine sites in
operation in Australia.


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.