MOTORBOATING
STEM-Based


MOTORBOATING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Motorboating or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35920
ISBN 978-0-8395-3345-0
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


MOTORBOATING 3


Note to Counselors
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the
requirements, procedures, and techniques presented in this pamphlet
and ensuring that each Scout earning the merit badge is able to
demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level consistent with the
requirements. In addition, counselors must ensure that all applicable
Scouting America safety policies, including Safe Swim Defense and
Safety Afloat, are followed during training, practice, and review.
Counselors for Motorboating merit badge must be registered
members of Scouting America, have current training in Safety Afloat,
and be approved by the local council Advancement Committee.
Councils with an Aquatics Committee should use that committee to
coordinate with the Advancement Committee for approval of qualified
counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge and
skills indicated by the requirements, experience in teaching such skills
to youth and experience in identifying and managing risks associated
with the activities involved. For the Motorboating merit badge,
appropriate credentials include: current or previous certification by an
organization (such as the National Safe Boating Council, the U.S. Power
Squadrons, the U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary or the U.S. Powerboating
component of U.S. Sailing) that meets the voluntary National On-Water
Standards for Powerboating or the NASBLA National Boating Education
Standards for Powerboating. The council Advancement Committee may
approve counselors with similar experience and training in knowledge,
skill, safety, and instruction.
Motorboating is an introductory, experiential merit badge. While it
is aligned with the National On-Water Standards, it is not intended to be
a certification. Scouts who desire additional training or certification
should explore the offerings of the organizations listed in the preceding
paragraph and in the pamphlet.
The decision for selection of equipment for Motorboating merit
badge lies with the counselor. While there are some requirements that
are intended to be met using a gas-powered motor, it is possible to use
an electric motor for the on-water requirements if it has sufficient
power to maintain adequate headway against current and wind.
Motorboating merit badge may not be earned utilizing personal
watercraft (PWCs).


MOTORBOATING 5
Contents
Boating Safely . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Signs and Signals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Boat Handling and Seamanship . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Care of Boat, Motor, and Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Weather . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Service and Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Motorboating Resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77





MOTORBOATING 7
.Boating Safely
Boating Safely
Learning to be a safe boater is a lot like learning to be a safe
driver. First, you will need to learn the nautical “rules of the
road” and obey them. You also will need to familiarize yourself
with federal, state, and local laws that affect recreational
boating. These laws regulate such things as the minimum age
for operator licensing; numbering of boats and operators;
required safety equipment, lights, and sound signals; speed
limits; maximum horsepower of the motor; hours of operation;
and areas where powerboats may be prohibited.
Scouting also has rules, standards, and precautions for
boating activities. In some respects, Scouting America standards
require measures and procedures that are stricter than federal,
state, and local laws.
When faced with
a “traffic jam”
or bottleneck
on a waterway,
you will need to
exercise the
same patience,
courtesy, and
common sense
you would use in
a similar situation
on a highway or
city street.
In cases where a Scouting America boating standard
differs from the government regulation, apply the one
that will ensure the highest level of safety.
Recreational motorboating is very popular, but make sure you
understand and follow all the safety rules.


8 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
Find out which rules and regulations apply before you
launch a boat. For federal laws, get the most current information
from the nearest U.S. Coast Guard office. For state laws, check
with the state agencies having jurisdiction over boating
activities in your state. For local regulations and general safety
guidance, consult boat and motor dealers or marine operators
and Scouting America publications such as the Guide to Safe
Scouting and this Motorboating merit badge pamphlet. The U.S.
Coast Guard boating safety website (www.uscgboating.org) also
has links to boating safety laws and resources. Check with your
merit badge counselor if you need help.
Personal watercraft are powered craft up to 10 feet
long. They are designed to be operated by sitting,
standing, or kneeling on the craft—sort of the aquatic
version of a motorbike. The Guide to Safe Scouting
specifically forbids the use of motorized personal
watercraft in Scouting aquatics and in or near Scouting
America program areas. It naturally follows that these
craft cannot be used to complete Motorboating merit badge
requirements—or for any other purpose on Scout outings or programs.
All powered craft must be currently registered and display
identifying information.


MOTORBOATING 9
.Boating Safely
The Guide to Safe Scouting requires that all participants in
Scouting aquatics activities:
• Know and practice the Safety Afloat guidelines.
• Are able to render first aid for the types of injuries and
illnesses that could happen while motorboating.
• Are familiar with appropriate life jackets and how to
fit them.
• Understand fire prevention measures and know how to
operate onboard fire extinguishers.
• Are familiar with the waterways they will be using.
• Respect and practice the nautical rules of the road.
Safety Afloat
The Safety Afloat guidelines were developed to promote
boating safety and to set standards for safe Scouting activity
afloat. Be sure to keep these guidelines in mind during all
boating activities.
1. Qualified Supervision
All activity afloat must be supervised by a mature and
conscientious adult age 21 or older who
• Understands and accepts responsibility for the well-being and
safety of the people in his or her care
• Is experienced in the water and the particular watercraft to
be used
• Is confident in his or her ability to respond in the event of
an emergency
• Is trained in and committed to complying with Safety Afloat
standards
Every Scout
boater should
study and
understand the
points of the
Safety Afloat plan.
The complete text
can be found in
the Guide to
Safe Scouting.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk and
first aid, you can be prepared to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any
motorboating hazard.


10 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
There should be one qualified adult supervisor for each
10 people, with a minimum of two adults for any group. At
least one supervisor must be age 21 or older, and the remaining
supervisors must be age 18 or older. At least one of these adults
must be certified in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR).
2. Personal Health Review
All participants must show evidence of fitness by presenting
a complete health history from a physician, parent, or legal guard-
ian. Adult supervisors will adjust the activity to anticipate any
potential risks associated with individual health conditions such
as diabetes, severe allergies, epilepsy, asthma, or heart conditions.
If a participant has any significant health conditions, the adult
leader should require proof of an examination by a physician.
3. Swimming Ability
Operation of any boat on a float trip is limited to youth and
adults who have completed the Scouting swimmer classification
test. For activity afloat, those not classified as a swimmer are
limited to multiperson craft during outings or float trips on calm
water with little likelihood of capsizing or falling overboard.
They may operate a fixed-seat rowboat or pedal boat
accompanied by a buddy who is a swimmer. They may ride in
a canoe or other paddle craft with an adult swimmer skilled in
that craft as a buddy. They may ride as part of a group on a
motorboat or sailboat operated by a skilled adult.
Scouting’s Swimmer Test
To qualify as a “swimmer,” you must pass the following
swimmer test. Jump feetfirst into water over your head
in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong
manner using one or more of the following strokes:
sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl. Then swim
25 yards using an easy resting backstroke. The 100
yards must be completed without any stops and must
include at least one sharp turn. After completing the
swim, rest by floating. You will need to renew this
qualification test each year.
Every skill
and maneuver
discussed in this
pamphlet must
be done while
wearing a
life jacket.


MOTORBOATING 11
.Boating Safely
4. Life Jackets
Properly fitted U.S. Coast
Guard–approved life jackets
must be worn by all persons
engaged in boating activity
(rowing, canoeing, sailing,
boardsailing, motorboating,
waterskiing, rafting,
tubing, and kayaking).
Type III life jackets are
recommended for general
recreational use.
5. Buddy System
All activity afloat must follow
the principles of the buddy
system. Every individual must
have a buddy, and every craft should have a buddy boat when
on the water. The buddy system assures that for every person
involved in an aquatics activity, at least one other person is
always aware of his or her situation and prepared to lend
assistance immediately when needed.
6. Skill Proficiency
All participants in activity afloat must be trained and experienced
in watercraft handling skills, safety, and emergency procedures.
Anyone operating a powerboat must be able to meet
requirements for the Motorboating merit badge or equivalent.
7. Planning
Float Plan. Know exactly where the group will put in and pull
out, and what course it will follow. Determine all stopover
points in advance, and review the plan beforehand with others
who have made the trip recently. Be sure to use accurate and
current maps of the waterways to be traveled, and estimate
travel time generously to allow for unexpected weather condi-
tions and to avoid traveling under time pressures. It is strongly
recommended that a currently trained BSA Lifeguard assist
groups in the planning and conducting of all activity afloat.
Local Rules. Determine which state and local laws or
regulations apply for your trip. Get written permission from
the owners or managers to use or cross private property.
Preferably, an
adult member of
the group should
run the course
before the trip
takes place.
Whenever you go boating, make sure you have a
buddy with you. If your boat goes afloat, the same
rule applies—go with a buddy boat.


12 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
Notification. Give a copy of your float plan to a few responsi-
ble adults who will be staying behind, such as the participants’
parent, guardian, or a troop committee member. Appropriate
authorities such as the Coast Guard, state police, or park per-
sonnel also should be notified of the activity when their juris-
diction is involved. Upon your return, check in with everyone
who has a copy of the float plan.
Weather. Be familiar with the seasonal weather pattern for the
area. Check the weather forecast just before setting out, and
keep an alert eye on the weather. Bring all craft ashore if rough
weather threatens.
Contingencies. Anticipate possible emergencies or other
circumstances that could force a change in the original plan,
and decide on alternate plans—just in case.
8. Equipment
All equipment must be suited to the craft, to the water
conditions, and to the individual; must be in good repair; and
must satisfy all state and U.S. Coast Guard requirements. To the
extent possible, carry spare equipment and appropriate repair
materials. Be sure that rescue equipment is available for
immediate use.
Carry an approved fire extinguisher, and know how to
use and maintain it.
In some cases, Sea Scout
standards may be substituted
for the Safety Afloat guidelines.
The Sea Scout standards may
be used when Venturers or Sea
Scouts operate cruising vessels
(including powerboats longer
than 20 feet) or participate in
any high-adventure program or
other activity under the direct
control of the National Council.
These activities all require
adult supervision.


MOTORBOATING 13
.Boating Safely
9. Discipline
All participants should know, understand, and respect the rules
and procedures for safe activity afloat. The group should review
the applicable rules just before setting off. Safety rules—plus
common sense and good judgment—keep the fun from being
spoiled by accidents or injury.
First Aid
Following the Safety Afloat guidelines will eliminate many
serious risks in outings afloat. However, some minor injuries
still might occur. Take appropriate precautions to be prepared.
Dehydration
Water is essential for nearly every bodily function, including
digestion, respiration, brain activity, producing heat, and stay-
ing cool. When more water is lost than the body is taking in, a
person risks becoming dehydrated. The first sign of dehydration
usually is dark urine. Other signs can include weariness, head-
ache, body aches, and confusion. Heat exhaustion, heatstroke,
and hypothermia may all be caused in part by dehydration.
Prevent dehydration by drinking plenty of fluids and eating
enough throughout the day to keep your body well-balanced.
This is easy to do on hot summer days when you are thirsty; it
is just as important in cold weather when you may not feel
thirsty. Drink enough so that your urine stays clear. If you
become weary or develop a headache or body aches, or if you
become confused, rest in the shade and sip water until the
symptoms go away.
Cold Water–Related Illnesses
There are two primary dangers from falling into cold water. In
the first few minutes, a person can experience cold-water
shock, even in water as warm as 69 to 77 degrees. The second
danger is hypothermia, which is a gradual lowering of the
body’s core temperature caused by spending minutes to hours
in water cooler than 80 degrees.
Cold-water shock occurs when a boater falls into very cold
water, especially below 60 degrees. The colder the water, the
more severe the effects. The body’s responses to cold water are
completely out of the person’s control. The first response will


14 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
be the reflex to take a deep, gasping breath, which is dangerous
if the person is underwater. Wearing a life jacket could save the
boater’s life in this case. Next the boater will start taking many
quick, short breaths, as many as three to four times the normal
rate, as if panting for air. This can make the person light-headed
and dizzy, and unable to hold his or her breath. In fact, cold-
water shock reduces the time you can hold your breath to 25
percent to 50 percent of normal. The person will also likely lose
any sense of up and down, and his or her heart rate and blood
pressure will go up. All of these effects can occur in about 60
seconds. During cold-water immersion, it is important that you
concentrate on self-rescue initially. If that is not possible, mini-
mize your exposure to the water by using the HELP position
(see sidebar) and wait for help.
If alone in cold water and more than a short distance
from safety, you can reduce heat loss by avoiding
movement, using clothing and the life jacket for
insulation, keeping your head above water, and
maintaining a tuck position. This is called the heat escape
lessening posture (HELP).
The only treatment for cold-water shock is to get the
boater out of the water. He or she will likely need to
be treated for hypothermia. Take care when boating in
cold waters. The best prevention for cold-water shock
and related injuries is to dress appropriately for the
weather and stay dry.


MOTORBOATING 15
.Boating Safely
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature falls
below the normal range. Exposure to cold, or even cool, water
can lower your core temperature dangerously. Early signs of
heat loss include bluish lips and shivering. Further cooling will
upset the ability to think clearly and to do simple tasks. Further
chilling will lead to unconsciousness and, eventually, death.
Treatment for hypothermia involves carefully removing the
person from the water, removing wet clothing, and drying him
or her. Warm the person by putting warm, dry clothes on him
or her and wrapping in blankets. Be sure to cover the head, as
most heat loss occurs from the head. Warm the person’s trunk
first, not the hands and feet as this can cause shock. If using
hot-water bottles or chemical hot packs, wrap them in cloth;
don’t apply them directly to the skin. Place the heating sources
on the chest, neck, and groin. Avoid rough handling or jerking
of the person, especially if the person is lethargic or
unconscious. This may cause the heart to develop life-
threatening irregular rhythms. If conscious, give the person a
warm drink. Avoid caffeine or alcohol. Once the body
temperature begins to rise, keep the person dry and wrapped in
a warm blanket with the head and neck covered. Avoid rapid
rewarming, as it can induce fatal heart rhythms.
Heat-Related Illnesses
Heat and dehydration can lead to heat exhaustion, which
happens when a person’s body cannot cool itself sufficiently.
Early symptoms of heat exhaustion include heavy sweating,
reddening of the skin, headache, faintness, fatigue, and
difficulty concentrating. Advanced symptoms can include pale,
clammy skin; nausea; muscle cramps; dizziness and fainting;
and possibly loss of consciousness.
If a member of your group is suffering from heat exhaus-
tion, get the person in the shade and lying down with the feet
raised. Encourage drinking small amounts of fluids; cool water
is best. Fan the person and apply cool, wet cloths to the skin.
Activities can resume when the person feels better, although it
can take a day or more for full recovery. If the condition wors-
ens, get medical help.
Victims of heat
exhaustion should
be cooled down
as quickly as
possible. Heat
exhaustion can
lead to heatstroke,
which is
very serious.


16 MOTORBOATING
When a person’s core temperature rises to life-threatening
levels (above 105 degrees), a condition called heatstroke occurs.
Sweating, which is the body’s natural cooling mechanism, may
stop entirely as the body dehydrates (dries out) and begins to
shut down. The body temperature soon rises to dangerous levels,
the pulse is extremely rapid, and the person will be disoriented
or lose consciousness. Symptoms may include hot, sweaty, red
skin; confusion; disorientation; and a rapid pulse.
Get medical help immediately. If not treated promptly, the
victim could die. To treat a heatstroke victim while waiting for a
doctor, work quickly to lower body temperature. The victim must
be cooled immediately. Move to a shady location and loosen
tight clothing. If you have ice packs, wrap them in a thin barrier
(such as a thin towel) and place them under the armpits and
against the neck and groin. Sponge the person with cool water;
apply cool, wet towels to the skin; and fan the person. If the per-
son is able to drink, offer small amounts of cool water. Monitor
the victim closely to guard against a relapse.
Sunburn is a fairly common and potentially serious result
of overexposure to the sun. Long-term exposure can result in an
increased risk of skin cancer. It is best to prevent sunburn by
covering up, wearing a hat and sunglasses, and using a water-
proof sunscreen with an SPF (sun protection factor) of at least
15. When it is practical, wear a broad-brimmed hat, pants, and
a long-sleeved shirt for protection. Avoid unnecessary direct
exposure to the sun, and limit strenuous physical activity and
exposure time. Treat sunburn by getting the person into the
shade and applying cool, wet cloths to the skin.
Motion Sickness
Motion sickness, known as seasickness when it occurs on a
boat, can happen to anyone, although some people are more
prone to it than others. The rougher the water conditions, the
more likely it is to occur. Motion sickness causes victims to feel
sick to their stomachs and can lead to vomiting. It helps if a
seasick victim remains in fresh air and stares at the horizon.
The worst place to be is below the deck in an enclosed cabin.
Motion sickness can make a person feel miserable, but it
normally is not life-threatening. Comfort the victim as much
as possible until you can get to shore or smoother waters.
The nausea goes away quickly after the motion stops.
Apply a waterproof
sunscreen liberally
and often when
you are outdoors.
Boating Safely.


.Boating Safely
Other First-Aid Concerns
Insect stings and bites are not common in motorboating.
However, knowing your aquatic environment and the launching
and loading areas, and avoiding possible contact is the best
strategy for avoiding stings and bites. For typical insect stings
and bites, carefully scrape away the stinger with the edge of a
knife blade. Trying to squeeze it out will force more venom into
the skin from the sac attached to the stinger. Apply an ice pack
to help reduce pain and swelling. For severe and prolonged
pain, or for any severe reaction, dizziness, or respiratory
distress, get medical help.
Tick bites are a common problem in the outdoors. If a tick
has attached itself, grasp it with tweezers close to the skin and
gently tug until it comes loose. Do not squeeze, twist, or jerk the
tick, as that might leave its mouthparts in the skin. Wash the
wound with soap and water, and apply antibiotic ointment.
After disposing of the tick, thoroughly wash your hands. If a tick
has been embedded for longer than a day or if it is difficult to
remove from the skin, see a physician.
Blisters form when the skin is irritated, usually by friction or
heat, and can be a nuisance on a motorboater’s hands. They may
also form when you are out wakeboarding or waterskiing.
A hot spot signals the beginning of a blister. If you develop a
hot spot, immediately stop what you are doing and protect the
tender area by covering it with a piece of moleskin or molefoam.
If a blister forms, build up several layers of moleskin or mole-
foam. It might be worthwhile to try a commercial product like
Second Skin® or Blist-O-Ban® in place of moleskin.
In rare cases, insect stings or bites can cause anaphylactic
shock, a condition that restricts breathing and requires
immediate treatment. People who know they might suffer
from anaphylactic shock often carry an EpiPen® for injecting
a measured dose of epinephrine in case they are stung.
MOTORBOATING 17
Frightened or anxious victims might breathe too heavily, too quickly, or too
deeply, which can result in hyperventilation, an abnormal loss of carbon
dioxide from the bloodstream. Victims might feel dizzy, disoriented, and as
if they are being suffocated. Treat someone who is hyperventilating by
speaking calmly and encouraging slow breathing. Make sure the person
rests in a comfortable position and has plenty of open, fresh air. Keep
bystanders well away.
EpiPen®


18 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
Type IV
Personal Flotation Devices (PFDs)
Properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard–approved life jackets must
be worn by all participants while on open water (rowing,
canoeing, sailing, boardsailing, motorboating, water-skiing,
wakeboarding, rafting, tubing, kayaking). Only U.S. Coast
Guard–approved equipment is acceptable for use in
Scouting aquatics. Ski belts are not acceptable. Scouts and
adult leaders should learn which type of life jacket is
appropriate for each specific circumstance and how to wear
them and check for proper fit.
Type I, Offshore Life Jacket. Type I devices are designed to
turn most unconscious victims faceup. The device gives a
lot of flotation in the chest, shoulders, and upper back areas.
The Type I life jacket is not designed for recreational boating
but for passengers on cruising vessels, such as ferries on large
bodies of water.
Type II, Near-Shore Buoyant Vest. These life jackets are
designed to turn an unconscious person in the water faceup in
calm, inland waters. Shaped like a horse collar, the Type II life
jacket design places all the flotation in the front and around
the neck. While it is not as bulky as the Type I, the Type II
can be uncomfortable for longer boating trips. Type II life
jackets are adequate for short periods of recreational boating
and instruction, and are recommended for closer, inshore
cruising on boats of all sizes.
Type III, Flotation Aid. These devices have the same buoyancy
as Type II life jackets and are designed to keep a conscious
person in a vertical or slightly backward position; they may
not prevent an unconscious person from floating facedown.
The Type III device has less turning ability than the Type II.
The Type III may be used while riding in a boat of any size.
Type IV, Throwable Device. Type IV devices are ring buoys
and seat cushions with straps. They are designed to be tossed to
a nearby person in the water and should never be used in place
of a wearable life jacket.
Type I
Type II
Type III


MOTORBOATING 19
Sizing and Maintaining a Life Jacket
To be effective, a life jacket must be fitted and worn properly. Make sure
that all side straps are adjusted to fit snugly, all ties are appropriately tied,
all zippers are zipped, and all buckles are fastened. To check the fit,
perform the shoulder strap test with a partner. Stand behind your partner
and firmly pull up both shoulder straps. If you can pull the shoulder
straps up to ear level, readjust the life jacket or try a different style or size.
While floating in calm, shallow water, test the fit of your life jacket by
relaxing your body and tilting your head back. A properly fitted and sized
life jacket will keep your chin well above water. If it does not, readjust
your life jacket or try one with a higher buoyancy rating (found on
the label).
Proper care and storage of life jackets is essential. Allow your life
jacket to drip-dry, and store it in a well-ventilated place away from direct
sunlight, which causes the fabric to fade and the flotation material to
weaken. Never use a life jacket as a kneeling pad or seat cushion, and
never cut or alter a life jacket. This includes gluing or sewing patches on
the fabric that covers the flotation material. Finally, do not repair tears or
holes in the material. If the fabric is ripped or if buckles are missing,
replace the life jacket.
Before you put on
a life jacket, check
that there is a U.S.
Coast Guard
approval number
on it.


20 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
Fire Protection
In addition to life jackets and navigational signaling equipment,
fire prevention measures and onboard fire extinguishers are
required by law for all powered craft. Fire extinguishers must
be of a marine type and U.S. Coast Guard–approved. Look on
the label for “Marine Type U.S.C.G. B:C Size I [or Size II].”
Dry chemical extinguishers are the most pop-
ular type of onboard fire extinguisher. They are
compact, lightweight, and inexpensive, and they do
an excellent job when used correctly. To operate,
most of these extinguishers require you to pull the
pin, aim the nozzle at the base of the fire, and
squeeze the lever. However, always follow the man-
ufacturer’s instructions, which should be clearly
posted on the unit itself.
Halon extinguishers use a colorless and odor-
less gas that interferes with the chemical reaction
involved in a fire. Some are portable, while others
may be installed in the engine compartment with a
heat sensor for automatic discharge as well as a pull
box at the helm station. The only disadvantages to halon extin-
guishers are their high cost and the fact that they must be peri-
odically inspected by a licensed service person.
Carbon dioxide extinguishers smother the fire by dis-
placing the oxygen that supports the flame. While these extin-
guishers are effective, they are heavy and they require regular
inspection. These units often are installed as a fire control
system in the engine compartment.
Once used, most extinguishers cannot be recharged and
should be discarded. Check the pressure gauge or pressure
button at least monthly. If the extinguisher is not fully charged,
properly dispose of it and buy a new one.
Every fire extinguisher has a letter rating (A, B, C, or D) that refers to the
type of fire it will extinguish. For example, B extinguishers are intended
to be used on fires caused by flammable liquids such as gasoline and oil.
Each extinguisher also has a numerical rating that refers to the size of
fire it can be expected to put out. A B-I extinguisher will extinguish a fire
(caused by a flammable liquid) that is no more than 1-foot square in size;
a B-II will put out a fire that is 2-feet square.
The Fire Safety
merit badge
pamphlet has
more information
on the proper
use and care of
fire extinguishers.
The onboard fire extinguisher
should be easily accessible to
the boat operator.


LENGTH OF VESSEL
REQUIRED
EQUIPMENT
SUMMARY
Less than 16 feet 16 feet to
less than 26 feet
26 feet to
less than 40 feet
40 feet to not
more than 65 feet
Certificate
and Number Required if propelled by machinery. Some states require one for all watercraft.
Backfire
Flame Arrester Required on each carburetor of all gasoline engines except outboards.
Ventilation Required for every closed engine or fuel tank compartment.
Life Jackets U.S. Coast Guard – approved Type I, II, or III life jacket required at all times for each person onboard.
Portable Fire
Extinguishers*
One B-I type, except
outboards with open fuel tanks. Two B-I types or one B-II type Three B-I types, or one B-I
type and two B-II types.
Pollution
Prevention Required on all vessels. Required on all vessels and placard must be posted.
Sound-producing
Device Not required. Efficient sound signal required. Whistle and bell required.
Navigation Lights Required if operating between sunset and sunrise.
Visual
Distress Signals**
Required between
sunset and sunrise.
Both day and night signals
required in coastal waters and Great Lakes.
*If an approved fixed system is installed, one fewer B-I is required.
**Strongly recommended but not required on inland waters.


22 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
Know the Water
Find out as much as possible about the river, lake, reservoir,
or bay before you launch your boat. If charts or other maps
are available, study them carefully and note the location of
any possible hazards such as rocks, shallow areas, reefs, or
bars. Find out if and how these underwater hazards are
marked. Once underway, travel slowly and carefully, keeping
alert for unusual features.
On rivers, check the current and water release patterns
by talking with others who know the water and by reviewing
data on current flow and water level fluctuations (changes)
from the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or other comparable
resources. In tidal water, get information on the time of high
and low tides and the level of fluctuation, and locate chan-
nels where you may meet much larger boats. On reservoirs,
find out ahead of time which areas may be restricted so that
you can avoid them.
Charts—marine
versions of
road maps—of
federal waterways
that show buoys,
water depths,
shoals, and so
forth are available
from the U.S.
Army Corps of
Engineers and the
U.S. Coast and
Geodetic Survey. Nautical Terms
Some terms are specific to the boating world. Knowing
them will help you understand position, direction, and
location of your boat.
abaft. Toward the stern; at the rear of the boat.
abeam. Refers to the position of an object; at right angles
to the center line of the boat. For instance, another boat,
a pier, or a lighthouse is abeam when it is abreast (by
the side) of your boat.
aft or after. In, near, or toward the stern or rear end of
the boat.
astern. The direction aft, or behind, the boat. An object
is astern when it is behind the boat. A boat is going
astern when it is moving backward.
leeward. The direction away from the wind; opposite
of windward.
windward. The direction from which the wind is
blowing; opposite of leeward. The windward (weather)
side of a boat is that toward the wind.


MOTORBOATING 23
.Boating Safely
Nautical Rules of the Road
The nautical rules of the road were created to promote safety
and help prevent collisions. It is important for all boaters to
learn and follow the navigation rules when encountering other
boats on the water.
Meeting. When two vessels approach each other head-on,
neither has the right-of-way. Each boat steers to the starboard
(that is, bears right) so that the boats pass port (left) side to
port side. The exception to this rule applies when boating in
the Great Lakes and on channels with strong currents. In these
cases, the vessel going downstream (being carried along by the
current) has the right-of-way and the vessel going upstream
must maneuver out of its way.
There are two important nautical rules you should fol-
low even when no other boats are in sight. First, have a
dedicated lookout person aboard who keeps an eye on
the water and clearly communicates any potential haz-
ard to the driver. Second, be sure the driver maintains
a speed that is safe and appropriate for the body of
water, the participants, and the activity.
On the water, to
“give way” means
to yield the
right-of-way.


24 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
Overtaking. When one boat is overtaking, or passing, another,
the one doing the overtaking must keep clear, while the boat
being overtaken does not alter its course or speed.
Sailboats. Sailboats always have the right-of-way over
powerboats, except in the unlikely event of a boat under
sail overtaking one under power. Courtesy also dictates
that racing sailboats be given a wide berth.


MOTORBOATING 25
.Boating Safely
Crossing. A motorboat preparing to
cross another motorboat that is in its
“danger zone” (see illustration) must
yield the right-of-way by altering its
course to go around its stern (the rear
of the boat), by slowing down, or, if
necessary, by stopping or reversing.
Thus, if a boat approaches your port
side (coming from your left), you have
the right-of-way and should maintain
course and speed.
Leaving Slips,
Wharves, and Piers.
Boats coming out of
slips into open water
or leaving berths at
piers and wharves
should proceed with
caution and at low
speed. They have no
rights-of-way until
they are entirely clear
in open water.
112.5º
DANGER
ZONE


26 MOTORBOATING
Boating Safely.
Towing. Tugs with barges in tow, whether alongside or pushing
ahead, should be given the right-of-way.
Yielding to Fishing Boats. Whether they are anchored or
underway with nets, lines, or trawls out, fishing boats have the
right-of-way. Boats engaged in trolling do not have the right-of-
way, but in any case, take care when passing a fishing party.
Responding to Accidents or Vessels in Distress. In cases of
collision, capsizing, fire, or other serious accidents, it is the
boater’s duty to render any help possible. A good boater is
always willing to offer a tow to a boater who has suffered an
engine breakdown or to loan gasoline to someone who has run
out of fuel.
It is a time-
honored tradition
that mariners
always go to
the aid of those
in distress.


MOTORBOATING 27
.Boating Safely
Exceptions to the Rule
It is important to know that there are different right-of-way
rules for motorboats, sailboats, and muscle-powered craft
(canoes, rowboats, kayaks, etc.). In general, motorboats have to
keep clear of sailboats, and both sailboats and motorboats must
keep clear of muscle-powered craft, although not always. Here
are some exceptions.
• All boats must keep clear of disabled vessels except to
render assistance.
• All boats must yield to vessels that do not maneuver
easily, such as barges or commercial fishing boats engaged
in fishing.
• In narrow channels, smaller boats must yield to ships and
deep-draft vessels that can operate only in the channel.
• Any vessel overtaking another must keep clear of the
overtaken vessel.
• A sailboat that is using an engine is considered a powerboat
and must follow powerboat rules.
Boat defensively—that is, simply steer clear of other
boats, even when you have the right-of-way. Other
boaters may not understand the rules as well as you
do, may not be alert, or may not be very skilled at
boat handling.





MOTORBOATING 29
.Signs and Signals
Signs and Signals
Learn the proper signs and signals to safely operate a boat.
Motorboat Lights
All boats are required by law to display lights from sunset to
sunrise, or whenever visibility is low, such as when fog rolls in.
These lights warn others of the presence of your boat, show if
you are under power or sail, and may indicate what you are
doing. By observing the properly displayed lights of another
boat, you can note its course, speed, and approximate size,
and tell if it is under power or sail.
Generally, green lights designate the starboard (right) side
of the boat, and red lights designate the port (left) side. The
more common lighting patterns for recreational vessels are
shown here.
Boats at anchor,
except those less
than 20 meters
(65.6 feet) long
when anchored
in a designated
anchorage area,
must display
anchor lights.
Note: Vessels over 50 meters (164 feet) will show a second, forward-facing white light,
at the rear of the boat and higher than the forward light.
Navigation lights for vessels under 20 meters (65.6 feet) long
POWER DRIVEN
OR
AT ANCHOR UNDER SAIL
RED RED REDGREEN GREEN GREEN
IF UNDER 12 METERS
(39.4 FEET)
WHITE
WHITE
WHITE


30 MOTORBOATING
Signs and Signals.
Standard sound signals


MOTORBOATING 31
.Signs and Signals
Sound Signals
In meeting, crossing, or overtaking, all power-driven vessels
should give the proper whistle signals. Power-driven vessels,
passing each other within half a mile, or small boats passing
each other within 10 boat lengths, must sound whistle signals
as shown in the illustration. In addition:
• Three short blasts are sounded whenever engines are going
astern (in reverse) or if the vessel is moving backward with
the engines stopped.
• Five or more short blasts are given in all cases of confusion
or doubt. This is the only signal that may be given in fog
before vessels sight each other. In this case it means simply
“danger.” When this signal is given, a vessel’s engine should
be slowed or stopped.
• Vessels leaving a pier or dock or nearing a river bend or
similar blind spot must blow one prolonged blast of
4 to 6 seconds.
Aids to Navigation
Much like street signs guide motorists on the road, the U.S.
Coast Guard’s standardized aids to navigation system indicates
hazards, safe channels, and on-the-water traffic patterns. These
navigational markers serve the commercial traffic on major
coastal and inland waters. Until 2004, waterways under state or
other jurisdiction used a simpler, uniform marker system. This
system was primarily for use by recreational boaters.
A “whistle” can be anything that can produce the signal
blasts as described here. The specifications for whistles
are defined in the U.S. Inland Navigation Rules.


32 MOTORBOATING
Signs and Signals.
U.S. AIDS TO NAVIGATION SYSTEM
(on navigable waters except western rivers and intracoastal waterway)
LATERAL SYSTEM AS SEEN ENTERING FROM SEAWARD
PORT SIDE
(ODD-NUMBERED AIDS)
SAFE WATER
(NO NUMBERS–MAY BE LETTERED)
STARBOARD SIDE
(EVEN-NUMBERED AIDS)
PREFERRED CHANNEL
(NO NUMBERS–MAY BE LETTERED)


MOTORBOATING 33
.Signs and Signals
FLAMES IN A BUCKET
CODE FLAGS NOVEMBER
AND CHARLIE HANDHELD FLARE
OR SMOKE
PARACHUTE WITH
A RED FLARE
Standard Marine Distress Signals
Unofficial but still widely recognized distress symbols include flying an
inverted U.S. flag or waving a red-orange flag of any size.
MORSE CODE SOS SIGNAL
BLACK SQUARE AND BALL
ON ORANGE FIELD
RADIO DISTRESS ALERT
RED METEOR FLARESWAVING ARMS
WATER DYE MARKER
OF ANY COLOR
FOGHORN SOUNDED
CONTINUOUSLY
MAYDAY CALL BY RADIO
SQUARE FLAG AND BALL
SHOTS FIRED IN THE AIR
AT ONE-MINUTE INTERVALS
RADIO BEACON





MOTORBOATING 35
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Boat Handling and
Seamanship
A good boater takes the time to understand boat-handling
basics and seamanship.
Motor Configurations
There are several motor configurations for motorboats. Each has
its advantages and disadvantages, depending on the activity.
Inboard, outboard, and inboard/outboard (I/O) motor configu-
rations are all appropriate for Scouting activities.
Inboard configurations, where the engine is just beyond
midship and fully accessible from the interior of the boat with
the propeller mounted under the boat several feet forward of
the stern line, are recommended for waterskiing and related
activities where people are in the water. Because the propeller
is well underneath the boat, there is less risk of propeller
injury. This configuration also provides optimal use of the rear
platform for easy access from the water into the boat and for
fitting and adjusting equipment before entering the water.
The rear platform on an inboard is ideal for activities such as
wakeboarding and water-skiing.


36 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Forward maneuverability also is usually better when pull-
ing skiers or boarders with the inboard engines and a center-
mounted tow pole. Maneuverability at low speed, however,
especially in reverse and on dock approaches, can be difficult.
Inboards are not recommended for beginner instruction and
practice on docking and close maneuvers.
The I/O configuration with an inboard motor is popular
for recreational boating. It does, however, have a rear exposed
(outboard) propeller. Maneuverability is good at all speeds and
in reverse, but rear-mounted tow bars can affect steering when
pulling a heavy skier, skiing tandem, or wakeboarding.
Outboards, where the entire power system is mounted at
the stern of the craft, are best for platform boats and fishing
craft. Today, outboard motors usually are large, powerful
engines and should not be mounted or serviced on the water in
Scouting programs. Although some smaller outboard motors are
still used on rowboats and for trolling, the use of outboard con-
figurations in the Scouting program should be limited to light-
weight electric motors specifically intended for such craft.
A vessel’s speed
is measured in
knots, or nautical
miles per hour.
Inboard motor
Whether you are using a motorboat with an inboard,
outboard, or inboard/outboard configuration, never
operate the boat unless it is equipped with a kill switch.


MOTORBOATING 37
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Inboard/outboard motor
Outboard motor


38 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Fueling
Most motorboats today use the same fuels as cars. Before you
refuel, carefully read the manufacturer’s fueling instructions for
your motor. Use only the grade and type of fuel recommended
by the manufacturer. Some older outboards may still require
hand-mixing of an oil and gas blend, but these motors usually
are small and unsuitable for Scouting programs.
The safest and most convenient way to fuel is to use the
retail pump at a local marina or fuel dock. Usually, a gas
attendant will fill the tank with the appropriate grade and
amount. If you find a self-service pump, follow the safety
procedures for home dock fueling, as discussed here.
Fortunately, many boats today can be fueled on the
trailer at the same pump where you fuel the tow
vehicle. Remember, however, that the same safety
precautions apply.
All gasoline-
powered engines
are required to
have a natural
ventilation
system for every
engine and fuel
tank consisting
of a fresh-air
supply and an
exhaust duct.


MOTORBOATING 39
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Fueling should be done only under supervision of your adult leader or a
trained instructor. Take the following precautions.
1. Have passengers and any crew not needed for fueling go ashore.
2. Make sure no one is smoking, and that there are no other open flames
or potential sources of ignition.
3. Fuel only in a well-ventilated area with the ignition in the “off” position.
4. If the fuel tank access is inboard, make sure all ports and hatches are
closed to prevent fumes or spills from going below.
5. Before beginning fuel flow, touch the metal tip of the fuel nozzle to a
metal piece on the boat to discharge any static charge.
6. Do not start pumping the fuel until the nozzle is securely set in the tank
opening. To avoid spills or drips, keep the nozzle turned upward when
removing it from the tank opening.
7. Wipe up any spilled fuel.
8. Be sure to tightly secure the tank cap.


Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Hitching the Trailer
Although larger craft are often kept on the water when not
in use, recreational boats used for skiing, fishing, and cruising
usually are kept on trailers, which is convenient for taking
them to and from recreational waters. For this reason, most
boat outings begin with the hauling of the boat to the
launch ramp.
Boats up to 26 feet, carried on a trailer that matches the
boat weight and shape, can be towed behind most full-size
sport utility vehicles, pickups, or sedans. It is important to
make sure the trailer is appropriate for the boat and that the
tow vehicle has enough weight and power to safely haul the
boat not only to and from the launch area, but also up and
down the ramp without slipping or stalling. Information from
boat and trailer dealers and manufacturers should explain
trailer and pulling weight requirements.
The tow bar on the towing vehicle should be installed by
the factory or dealer. Underbody sleeves with interchangeable
hitches are convenient. Hitch balls come in several sizes and
must be sized correctly for the hitch socket. In addition to the
ball and socket, the hitch should have safety chains that hook
into fixed positions mounted to the frame of the vehicle on
both sides of the tow bar.
The trailer must have an electrical connection for lights
when traveling at night and for warning lights on the trailer
that will flash when the brakes are applied. A breakaway con-
nection may also be available on some trailers to automatically
brake the trailer wheels should the trailer suddenly disconnect
from the vehicle. Some trailers also come equipped with a spe-
cial braking mechanism that applies automatically when head-
ing downhill, to help reduce the “push” of the trailer.
One safety chain may be sufficient for lighter craft,
but two chains are recommended.


MOTORBOATING 41
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
To engage the hitch, do the following.
Step 1—Crank down the front wheel of the trailer until the
hitch socket is above the level of the ball top.
Step 2—Back up the vehicle to position the ball directly below
the socket; set the vehicle brake and turn off the engine.


42 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Step 3—Crank up the trailer’s front wheel until the socket has
settled down completely onto the ball. If the socket does not
settle smoothly onto the ball, raise it back up and either shift
the front end of the boat or reposition the vehicle.
Depending on the style of the trailer, once the front wheel
is off the ground with the front weight entirely on the hitch, the
wheel assembly can be folded out of the way or removed and
stored. Never leave the wheel in a position where it might
contact the ground while traveling, launching, or loading.
Do not try to shift the front of the trailer if the weight is
resting on the ball. A sudden drop could cause serious
injury or damage the equipment.
Fold down the hitch locking mechanism.
Fold up the front wheel assembly.


MOTORBOATING 43
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Step 4—Before towing, remember to
set and pin the locking mechanism on
the socket, hook the safety chains, join
the electrical connections, and engage
the breakaway line, if available.
Step 5—Have the driver move the
vehicle forward slowly to take out the
slack in the hitch. Watch to make sure everything is connected
and working properly. You are now ready for the drive to the
launch area.
Secure the safety catch or pin on the
hitch lock (1), hook the safety chains (2),
and join the electrical connections (3).
Attach the breakaway line.
To unhitch the
trailer, reverse
the hitching
procedures.
Remember to
chock the wheels
securely before
lifting the socket
from the ball.
1 2
3


44 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Launching From the Trailer
When you arrive at the launch area, park above the ramp with
the rear of the trailer toward the water. When you are in posi-
tion, the rear of the trailer should be at least a trailer length
from the waterline. Set the tow vehicle brakes securely. If the
ramp is steep or if conditions are slippery, chock the wheels.
At public access
areas there
may be a waiting
line to launch.
Get your place
in line before
beginning launch
preparations.
Before launching, remove the boat cover and tie-down straps.
Every boat has a drain plug somewhere in the bilge, the part
of the hull below the deck. Be sure the plug is firmly in place
before you launch. Unplugged boats usually sink just off the
launch ramp.


MOTORBOATING 45
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Before beginning the launch, remove the boat cover and
tie-down straps. Be sure the bilge plug is securely in place.
Check the battery connections and any other connections that
could have loosened during transport.
Walk down the ramp to the water’s edge and look for
hazards. Check the water depth and note the steepness of the
ramp. Decide whether one person can be in the boat safely
without damaging any equipment as the trailer is backed down
the ramp. If this is appropriate and at least three people are
available, one person can get in the boat while a second one
stands to the left side of the vehicle. The third person can be
the driver.
With one person standing near the water’s edge in mirror
view of the driver and giving directions, the driver should back
slowly into the water until the boat first begins to lift from the
trailer. At this point, the trailer brakes should be locked or held
securely. If someone is in the boat, then the driver should
remain in the vehicle while the third person releases the lock
on the trailer crank and loosens the trailer bow line.
When the line is slack, disconnect from the boat, push
the bow out gently to confirm that the boat is floating free of
the trailer, and signal to the boat driver to start the motor and
back clear of the trailer. As the trailer and tow vehicle are
moved off the ramp to the appropriate parking and storage
area, bring the boat to a dock or shallow area to load
passengers and equipment.
If the boat has been out of service for a lengthy period,
be sure to test the battery before launching. One quick
test is to flick on the lights or the vent fan.
If the ramp is steep and the driver needs to get out to
complete the launch, the front wheels of the tow vehi-
cle should be chocked.


46 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Loading the Trailer
Loading the boat on the trailer is basically just the reverse of
the launch procedures.
Step 1—Back the trailer down the ramp, guided by one person
at the water’s edge.
Step 2—When the trailer is in position at the proper depth,
signal the boat operator to bring the boat in slowly.


MOTORBOATING 47
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Step 3—The boat operator cuts the motor’s power as the bow
slowly passes over the rear of the trailer and coasts into position.
Step 4—As the bow point of the keel touches the front roller of
the trailer, hook the tow strap to the bow tow ring.


48 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Step 5—Now crank the boat forward until the bow touches the
front trailer rest. At this point, lock the crank. Be sure the safety
lock bar goes through the boat ring.
Step 6—When everything is secure, signal to the vehicle driver
to pull up slowly while observing how the boat settles onto the
trailer as it exits the water. If for some reason the boat does not
settle properly onto the trailer supports, stop and back the trailer
down the ramp until the boat begins to lift so it can be pushed
into position.


MOTORBOATING 49
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Once the boat and trailer have cleared the ramp, you can
load or unload gear for transport, open the drain plug, replace
the boat cover, and attach the tie-down straps. When everything
has been secured, you are ready to travel.
Loading the Boat
Your boat’s performance is affected by how it is loaded and
how the weight is distributed both fore and aft and side to side.
Naturally, if everyone sits toward the stern, the bow will be
high. If, instead, you have everyone seated in the bow, your
boat will be “down by the head,” as the sailors say, and will be
difficult to maneuver.
Do not crowd your boat. It will carry only a limited num-
ber of people safely, and the number of seats is not a reliable
measure of capacity. Take into consideration the weather and
water conditions, too. If the water is rough, take fewer people.
When in proper position on the trailer, the bow should be on the
bow support. The hull should be supported without depressing or
distorting the boat’s contours.
The U.S. Coast Guard capacity information label (prominently displayed
on every boat) provides safety information to reduce the dangers of
inadvertent overloading or overpowering. These recommended values
are for fair weather. Follow them, but also take into consideration the
weather and your crew’s boating experience. Always exercise good
judgment and caution.


50 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
The same principle of weight distribution applies to the
loading of supplies, equipment, and camping gear. Regarding the
boat’s equipment—anchor, tools, paddle, fenders—never forget
the old seaman’s adage: “A place for everything and everything
in its place.” Nothing is quite so lubberly (unseamanlike) as a
boat with things lying about loose in the bilges or on the floor-
boards or seats. Unstowed gear can be dangerous in rough
water; you also risk losing it over the side. Store gear in the
storage compartments in the bow or under the seats or deck.
While the boat is held at dock, pass gear to a person in the boat
for proper storage.
Storage under seats helps passengers avoid cluttering the deck
with loose lines, anchors, and other equipment.


MOTORBOATING 51
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Boarding the Boat
When you are boarding from a float or low pier, step aboard as
nearly amidships (center) as possible, keeping your weight low
and using your hands on the gunwales (sides) for balance.
When getting aboard from a high pier, step down to the bow
deck or other high part of the craft that will easily support your
weight. Inboard engine housing may provide a good step-down
point. From the high point, step quickly but carefully down to
the deck. Do not step or stand on the gunwale unless there is a
factory-installed step position.
Keep the dock lines tight or have someone steady the boat
for you as you board. Also, do not carry things aboard; keep
your hands free. Have someone hand you your packages after
you are aboard, or reach back to the float for them after you
are on board.
If you are embarking from the beach, get in over the bow
or over the gunwale near the bow, with the forward point of
the boat kept lightly grounded. Then move to the stern to lift
the bow so the boat can be paddled or powered to deeper water
without dragging bottom.
Never jump into
the boat.


52 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Starting the Engine
All watercraft with an inboard engine should have an engine
compartment vent fan that can be operated with the ignition off
or in the accessory position. Fuel vapors can accumulate in the
enclosed engine compartment and ignite explosively when the
engine is started, so always vent before you start. Run the vent
fan for a minute before ignition if the boat has been sitting for
an hour or more, particularly if it has been sitting in the sun.
After running the vent fan, put the shift
lever in neutral and start the engine by turn-
ing the ignition key or pressing a start button.
Let the engine start and idle for a moment
before engaging the propeller. During this
moment, check the dials to be sure every-
thing is running properly, fuel is sufficient,
and the computer (commonly installed in
modern boats) signals no needs or problems.
Getting Underway
If you are getting underway from a beach or shallow area, push,
pole, or paddle out of the shallow water before going through
your starting routine. You do not want to churn up the bottom
and damage the propeller. If you are launching an outboard or
I/O, tilt the motor up or raise the lower unit to protect the
propeller while your partner paddles or pushes off from the bow.
When you are getting underway from a float or pier,
remember that boats do not steer like cars or bikes, which
follow their front wheels. In a motorboat, the stern responds
first to the steering impulse and goes in the opposite direction
from how the bow is being
headed. In other words,
the boat turns by swing-
ing the stern around
and pushing the bow.
DIRECTION OF
THE BOW SWING
Be sure to
perform a safety
check of the
boat’s equipment
before getting
underway.
Starting the engine requires a few precautions
to ensure the safety of all passengers.
DIRECTION
OF THE STERN
SWING


For this reason, if you turn out sharply
from a dockside or pier, the stern will be driven
against the dockside. This results in a common
type of damage on boats driven by novice drivers.
To avoid this problem when there is sufficient open
water in front of the dock, or when the wind or waves
are pushing the craft into the dock, turn out and slowly
reverse so that the stern moves out. Bring the bow around in
a half circle. When the bow has come around and is headed
toward open water, shift to forward and proceed.
Note that inboards with a hull-mounted
propeller forward of the rudder will be less
steer-responsive in reverse (as compared
to an outboard or I/O motor) and will
have somewhat less of a stern swing
when turning but still will have the
rear-steering dynamic.
Underway Maneuvers
Once underway, there are three important rules to follow.
Keep the boat under control. Do not run at high speeds
where sudden turns or stops might be necessary. Remember
that higher speeds require wider turns. Heavier loads also
require slower and wider turns. For both safety and courtesy,
reduce speeds and avoid sharp maneuvers when other craft
are present.
Always be alert. Keep an eye on other boats, and watch for
floating hazards, shoals, markers, and other obstructions.
If you have a skier or a boarder in tow, be sure at least one
other person is watching the skier/boarder and communicating
with you. Plan your route well ahead of the boat to avoid last-
second decisions and sudden maneuvers. Without being
distracted, be aware of what is going on in your boat.
Follow the rules. The nautical “rules of the road” and the
safety procedures put out by the U.S. Coast Guard, Scouting
America, and your state can assure safety and fair opportunity
only if they are followed. Be a good citizen and a safe boater.
PIER
RIGHT
TURN
LEFT
TURN


54 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Landing
One of the maneuvers in which you will take pride is making
a landing (or picking up a mooring if your boat lies offshore
instead of being beached or snugged against a pier or float).
A good landing requires control of the boat and knowl-
edge of what effect, if any, the wind and current will
have on the boat.
In tidal waters or streams where there is
noticeable current, it is best to make uptide
or upstream landings unless the wind is so
strong that it more than offsets these factors.
Where current or tidal flow does not have
to be considered, make your landing with
the bow into the wind, if possible. A glance
at a buoy or a look at the way other boats
are lying to their moorings will tell you the
direction of the current.
For inexperienced boat handlers, waves can be
intimidating. When crossing the wake of another
boat or heading into waves caused by the wind,
angle in slightly off the perpendicular.


MOTORBOATING 55
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Suppose you are heading downstream with the current,
and the float you wish to tie up to is on the left bank. To make
a good landing, wait until you are abreast of the float and then
throttle the motor down and begin an easy left turn. When you
are below the float, head upstream in such a way as to bring
the starboard side of your boat parallel to the outside edge of
the float and a foot or so away from it.
When your bow passes the lower end of the float, stop
the engine and put it into neutral, flip the fenders over the rail,
and steer the boat gently alongside. Hold onto the float until
someone takes your bow line, or step ashore with it yourself.
The same principles of speed and approach apply to picking
up a mooring buoy.
If there is no wind or current, approach the dock at a
forward angle at very low speed with bumpers in place, cut for-
ward power 8 to 10 feet from your intended point of contact,
tap into reverse just before contact so the boat stops, and slip
into neutral before the boat begins to back. On a good landing
approach, the passenger on the dock side is easily able to place
his or her hand on the pier. Secure or hold the boat at the pier
while passengers and equipment are loaded or unloaded.
Avoid making
dangerous
“landlubber”
mistakes, such as
coming in for a
landing at high
speed or at
a right angle to
the float. Even
when you must
head right for the
beach, go slowly
and swing your
engine up before
it hits bottom.
CURRENTWIND


56 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
If your only option is to land in shallows, direct the bow
toward the beaching area under very low power, cut forward
power several boat lengths from shore where there is still
propeller clearance, and tap into reverse just before the bow
touches bottom. With the boat momentarily stationary and
before it begins to drift, someone wading from shore can take
hold of the bow or bow line. If no one is on shore to meet the
boat, then someone in the boat should go overboard in the
shallow water to hold or secure the boat. If the beach area is
suitable, an outboard or I/O can be pulled or paddled (with
motor in the up position) parallel to the waterline for loading
or unloading. Otherwise, loading and unloading should be over
the bow.


MOTORBOATING 57
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
When landing an outboard or I/O, approach at a slow speed, approximately
30 degrees to the pier, alternately going ahead slowly and stopping the
engine as necessary. When the bow is close to the pier, turn slowly and
head parallel to the pier. Then reverse the engine, give left rudder, and
move in against the pier.


58 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Mooring
How you secure your boat depends on the arrangement of cleats
or rings on the wharf, pier, or float where you plan to moor.
Floats usually are fitted with cleats or rings and are some-
times held in place by stakes or piles, which also may be used
for your mooring lines. Wharves and piers may have rings or
cleats, depending on their size and purpose.
If your bow and stern lines have an eye, or loop, spliced
into one end, mooring will be quite simple. You can throw the
eye over a cleat and take up the slack on board. If your lines
have no eyes, a couple of figure eights around a cleat with a
final half hitch to lock them will do well. For securing to piles
or stakes, a round turn and two half hitches will work in quiet
water, but a clove hitch or bowline is a better choice. Usually,
one line leading from the bow is sufficient to moor a boat
alongside for a short time, but using a stern line as well is a
better practice.
Bowline
Making fast to a cleat
Clove hitch


MOTORBOATING 59
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
When making fast to a wharf or pier in tidal waters, be sure to leave
enough slack in the lines to allow for the rise and fall of the tide. If you
don’t, you are likely to either pull out the deck cleats when the tide falls
away from under the boat or jam the boat into such a position that it will
swamp when the tide comes in again.
Neat and efficient figure eights on a cleat with slippery hitch and coil


60 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
Anchors and Anchoring
Every boat needs an anchor. What size and type of anchor you
use depends on how large the boat is and what sort of bottom
you generally will anchor in: rocky, muddy, or sandy. A short
stockless anchor might do, or you could use one of the many
lightweight patented hooks, some of which hold better than
others in different kinds of bottoms. No matter what type of
anchor you have, be sure to have it made up with the line
secured to it, ready to use when you are cruising or making
long runs.
In moderate weather, a safe ratio of length of anchor line
to water depth is 7-to-1. In other words, if you anchor in 10 feet
of water, 70 feet of line is generally the proper length. If your
boat is light and there is no breeze or current, half that length
would do for a short time but not overnight or if the boat is to
be left unattended.
The Danforth
anchor folds
flat for safe,
convenient
storage.
NAVY ANCHOR
DANFORTH
NORTHILL
PLOW OR CQR
MUSHROOM


MOTORBOATING 61
.Boat Handling and Seamanship
Good Anchoring Technique
Here are a few points to remember when anchoring.
• Before dropping the anchor into the water, be sure that
the line is attached properly—to the anchor as well as
to the boat.
• Do not throw the anchor out into the water; just lower it
alongside the bow.
• Have the anchor line coiled clear for running, with no kinks,
bights (loops), or knots in it.
• Do not stand on the coil when letting the anchor go—unless
you want to go, too.
Buoying the Anchor
When anchoring on a rocky bottom, it is a good idea
to tie a buoyed line to the anchor’s crown so it can be
pulled out backward in case it jams. A plastic bleach
bottle or milk jug with the cap permanently secured
makes a good buoy.


62 MOTORBOATING
Boat Handling and Seamanship.
When you prepare to anchor, look over the place first and
then head into the wind or tide (whichever is stronger), nosing
your boat in slowly until you find the spot you want. Put over
the anchor when stopped and then move back under reversed
engine, playing out the anchor cable about six times the depth
of the water. Next, take a turn around the bitts or Samson
post and set the anchor under the momentum of the reversed
engine. Have a second, heavier anchor on deck, ready to use
in an emergency.
Remember that for good anchoring, the length of anchor line used should
be about seven times the distance from your boat’s gunwale to the bottom.
Adding a 6-foot length of chain between the anchor and the line will help
keep the anchor flat and reduce the chafing as the boat swings.








MOTORBOATING 65
.Care of Boat, Motor, and Equipment
Care of Boat, Motor,
and Equipment
With the fun of owning or operating a boat comes the responsi-
bility for keeping that boat, its power plant, and equipment in
first-class condition.
A boat constructed with quality materials will remain
seaworthy for many years if it gets proper care along the way.
It can become a pitiful hulk in a few years, however, if
carelessly treated and neglected.
Maintaining the appearance and efficiency of your boat
can be a source of great pride. Not too long ago, the
highest compliment a good boater could get was this:
“Everything about your boat is shipshape and Bristol
fashion.” The origin of the expression is somewhat
obscure, but it is believed to have come from the hey-
day of sailing ships when windjammers out of Bristol,
England, had a lofty reputation for being scrubbed and
polished with their gear kept in the best possible shape.


66 MOTORBOATING
Care of Boat, Motor, and Equipment.
Cleaning and Polishing
It is fairly easy to keep a boat looking good and performing like
new. Today’s fiberglass boats are much easier to maintain than
the wooden-hulled boats they have largely replaced. Here are
some hints for easy boat maintenance.
Keep the hull and topsides cleaned and polished. A fiber-
glass boat is built up with layers of glass matting bonded
together with a plastic. The outer surface is covered with a
material known as gelcoat. When exposed to the sun and
weather, the gelcoat can become dull and faded and can oxi-
dize (break down) to powder.
Several brands of cleaners and boat polishes on the market
can protect the gelcoat finish and restore one that has been
neglected. Visit a marine dealer or a good hardware store and
find out which brand would work best for your boat. Carefully
follow the label instructions. The first application in a badly
oxidized surface will take some elbow grease, but a quick wash
and polish every month or so will keep things shining.
Most boats have a few fittings of teak, a wood traditionally
used on boats because it resists weathering. The best way to
protect this fine wood is with teak oil. If the teak is in bad
shape, you can use cleaners, bleachers, and oil finishes to help
restore it. It is not a good idea to varnish teak unless you are
prepared to sand it down and refinish it regularly.
Be a good housekeeper. Wash down the boat after every use.
If you have been boating in the ocean, use freshwater if possi-
ble. Mop the topsides and sweep the cockpit carpeting. Put
everything away, making sure all gear is thoroughly dry before
storing it in a locker or closed space. Keep your bilges clean and
dry. Remember, all boats take on a certain amount of water and
engines drip oil, so you will have to swab out bilges regularly.
Antipollution laws prohibit pumping oily bilges over the side,
so you will need to pump or bail the oily water into a bucket
and properly dispose of it ashore.


MOTORBOATING 67
.Care of Boat, Motor, and Equipment
Invest in a properly fitted boat cover. A boat cover will shield
the boat from the sun, keep rainwater out, protect it from birds
and other wildlife, and help keep dust and dirt from blowing
into the boat.
Don’t forget the underside. If your boat is kept at a mooring
or pier slip on the water, it should be periodically taken from
the water to clean and treat for marine growth. The frequency
of this care depends on the characteristics of the local water.
A buildup of algae or barnacle growth can damage the hull and
affect speed and fuel consumption. Even boats that are trailered
between outings will need a good bottom cleaning from time to
time, particularly at the waterline. Watch for stains and clean
the boat when buildup appears. A nonabrasive tub and tile
cleaner will remove stains and keep the gelcoat shining.
Dings and Dents
Sooner or later you are going to bump into something and
scratch or gouge the hull. It is important that these dings be
sealed promptly to keep moisture from invading the fiberglass.
Patching compound is available from marine dealers. Follow
the manufacturer’s instructions on the label. Mix the hardening
agent with the color-matched plastic, and work quickly before it
sets. Apply the patch a little higher than the surrounding
surface. When it has hardened and cured, you can then sand it
down with fine sandpaper. Finish it off with rubbing com-
pound, and it will look as good as new.
A good crop of
barnacles—a
form of marine
life that grows
on the bottoms
of boats in salt
water—will
reduce a
boat’s speed.
For deep gouges or holes punched through the hull, it
is best to have the damage repaired professionally.


68 MOTORBOATING
Care of Boat, Motor, and Equipment.
Caring for Your Equipment
Dock and anchor lines, life jackets, cushions, canvas-covered
fenders, and other such equipment are bound to get wet on
boats. Careless handling of such equipment means a shorter
life for them and expensive replacements. Stow your
equipment neatly so that you can get at each piece
when you need it without upsetting everything else.
To help prevent mildew and rot, dry your lines, cush-
ions, and other gear in the shade before stowing
them. Be sure the storage area is well-ventilated.
Few things are more annoying and less seagoing than line
with ends that have been allowed to unravel and fray into
“cows’ tails,” as sailors mockingly call them. Ends should
always be protected by back-splicing, whipping, or fusing. Lines
made of synthetic or natural fibers can be back-spliced or eye-
spliced if they are made of twisted strands. Woven plastic lines
can be easily eye-spliced using a
special splicing tool available from your
plastic line supplier. Natural fiber lines
(which require whipping) are rarely
used for recreational boating these
days, so most likely you will
need to heat-fuse the ends of
synthetic lines to prevent
unraveling and prolong
the life of the lines.
Fusing and
whipping are
Tenderfoot skills
that you can
review in your
Scouts BSA
Handbook. You
will find
information on
splicing in the
Pioneering merit
badge pamphlet.
Equipment lasts longer when it is neatly stored in a secure,
dry area.
Whipping
Back
splice


MOTORBOATING 69
.Care of Boat, Motor, and Equipment
The Motor
Today’s boat motors—inboard and outboard—should be serviced
and repaired by professionals. The owner’s manual will provide a
maintenance schedule and will identify servicing procedures.
Learn and follow these manufacturer recommendations.
Although much of your motor’s servicing will need to be
done professionally, you should learn a few basic maintenance
practices. For example, you should learn how to maintain and
service the battery and how to check and maintain fluid levels
(oil and hydraulics). Boat engines that are water-cooled using
water drawn from a lake or river require seasonal winterizing
to prevent freezing damage. The water is drained from the
engine block and usually replaced with chemical antifreeze.
For environmental reasons, it is best to dewinterize by draining
and properly disposing of the antifreeze rather than allowing
it to flush into the waterway when the boat is first used
in the spring.
If the boat motor is professionally serviced and inspected
at the beginning and end of the boating season, and properly
used and serviced by the operator during the season, most
problems can be avoided. For boats used year-round, manufac-
turer service schedules and procedures, usually based on oper-
ating hours, should be followed.
Pull the dipstick to check the engine fluid levels.





MOTORBOATING 71
.Weather
Weather
Always check weather conditions and forecasts before going out
on the water. Constantly updated information from the U.S.
Weather Bureau is available on weather station monitors in
most marinas, on continuous radio broadcasts, and on the
Weather Channel broadcast on most cable and satellite TV
providers. This information is also available online and on
most mobile phone systems.
Weather systems usually move in patterns unique to the
region and time of year, so seasonal patterns should always
be considered when planning any boating activity. Directional
movement of fronts—weather systems where masses of warm
and cool air meet and produce storms—is predictable in most
locales, based on historical data. Learn these seasonal weather
patterns for your area and the signs that indicate the weather
is about to change.
Taking a mobile phone out on your boat can help you keep tabs on
the weather, but remember that they are not always reliable. Also, if
you take a mobile phone onboard, be sure to keep it protected in a
resealable plastic bag.
Remember that
the only
constant in the
weather is
change. Check
and recheck
weather
information
sources
periodically—
hourly while on
the water.
Weather service monitors in marinas or online provide
up-to-date information.


72 MOTORBOATING
Weather.
Plan outings by taking into account seasonal weather
patterns and by using your knowledge and experience of
local weather patterns. With an understanding of seasonal
patterns and signs of change, you will be able to recognize
upcoming weather changes—particularly the onset of danger-
ous weather. For example, changes in wind direction or veloc-
ity, the development of certain cloud formations, and a drop in
barometric pressure all signal that severe weather may be on
its way.
Signs of Fair Weather
Expect pleasant weather when you see some of
these signs:
• “Red sky at night, sailor’s delight.” The dust particles
in the dry air produce a glowing red sunset.
• “Swallows flying way up high
mean there’s no rain in the
sky.” Swallows are birds that
catch and eat flying insects.
In the high air pressure that
comes with fair weather,
insects can be carried aloft
by air currents.
• “If smoke goes high, no rain
comes by.” Campfire smoke
rises straight up when there
is no wind. Still air is generally
stable and will not move mois-
ture into an area.
• “When the dew is on the grass,
rain will never come to pass.”
Dew forms when air moisture
condenses on cool leaves and
grass. This happens especially
during the cool, clear nights
that come with good weather
and high pressure.


MOTORBOATING 73
.Weather
If you notice an approaching storm, get off the water as
quickly as possible. If caught in a storm, stay low and get to the
dock as soon as possible.
If you see lightning, keep a low profile in the boat until
you reach shore. During a lightning storm, get off and stay off
the water and away from open or exposed shorelines. On shore,
stay away from tall geographical features such as trees. Remove
your life jacket, place it on the ground, and crouch low on it.
Stand at least 100 feet apart from your companions.
Signs of Stormy Weather
The following signs suggest bad weather is on the way:
• “Red sky at morning, sailor take warning.” Dry, dusty
air is moving away toward the east. Clouds and
moist air might be coming in from the west.
• “Swallows flying near the ground mean a storm will
come around.” The low air pressure that pulls in
stormy weather causes insects to fly close to the
ground on heavy, moist wings. Swallows feeding on
them will follow.
• “If smoke hangs low, watch out for a blow.” Low air
pressure can prevent campfire smoke from rising
very high.
• “When grass is
dry at morning
light, look for rain
before the night.”
On a cloudy night,
grass might not
cool enough for
dew to form.





MOTORBOATING 75
.Service and Emergencies
Service and
Emergencies
Scouts with boating skills can offer service to people and
their communities in many ways. Good Turns can range from
everyday courtesies and errands to saving lives and property
during serious emergencies. Nowhere does the Scout motto—
Be Prepared—mean more than it does on the open water.
When bridges are out and roads are under water, the
motorboat takes over. In regions where flooding is common,
a Scout troop with a trained boater in its ranks should be
organized and prepared to assist local authorities in critical
situations. Such assistance can be invaluable.
When you are out on a lake, river, or bay in your boat,
always be ready to assist someone in need. The loan of a little
gasoline, the towing of a boat with engine failure, and the
return of a boat that has gone adrift are small things, but the
people you help will be grateful to you and your Scout training.
Sometimes you can loan a pump or bailing can to someone
with a badly leaking boat and help keep it afloat until it can be
beached. There might be times when you can help swimmers
who overestimated their endurance and became tired before
they could get back to shore.
You might even have to rescue people whose boat has
capsized or swamped. If you find yourself in a situation that
requires that you take people into your boat from the water,
get them in over the stern, where you have the widest safety
margin for such an operation.
In a person overboard situation—when someone falls out
of your boat—first throw a life ring or floating cushion to the
person. Then turn immediately, circling up to him or her slowly
and carefully so the boat does not hit the person. When along-
side the person in the water, stop the engine and help him or
her back aboard over the stern.
As you become
an experienced
boater, you can
help teach
newcomers by
sharing your
knowledge.





MOTORBOATING 77
.Motorboating Resources
Motorboating Resources
Scouting Literature
Canoeing, First Aid, Fire Safety, Fishing,
Fly-Fishing, Kayaking, Lifesaving,
Pioneering, Rowing, Scuba Diving,
Small-Boat Sailing, Swimming,
Waterskiing, Weather, and Whitewater
merit badge pamphlets; Scouts BSA
Handbook for Boys, Scouts BSA
Handbook for Girls, and Fieldbook
Books
Aarons, Richard N. Small-Boat
Seamanship Manual. International
Marine/Ragged Mountain
Press, 2006.
American Red Cross. American Red Cross
First Aid: Responding to Emergencies.
Staywell, 2007.
Armstrong, Bob. Getting Started in
Powerboating, 3rd ed. International
Marine/Ragged Mountain Press, 2005.
Browne, Steven D. Nautical Rules of
the Road: The International and
Inland Rules, 4th ed. Cornell
Maritime Press, 2006.
Eaton, Jonathan. Chapman Piloting &
Seamanship, 68th ed. Hearst, 2017.
Larkin, Frank J. Basic Coastal
Navigation: An Introduction to
Piloting, 2nd ed. Sheridan
House, 1998.
Low, Charles T. Boat Docking:
Close Quarters Maneuvering for
Small Craft. Harvey Island
Enterprises, 1997.
Siminoff, Roger H. Boating 101: Essential
Lessons for Boaters. International
Marine/Ragged Mountain
Press, 1999.
Stagner, Eugene. Understanding the
Outboard Motor, 3rd ed. Prentice
Hall, 2002.
Thompson, Luke. Essential Boating for
Teens. Children’s Press, 2000.
U.S. Sailing Association. Start
Powerboating Right! 3rd ed. United
States Sailing Association, 2013.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


78 MOTORBOATING
Motorboating Resources.
DVDs
The following DVDs are available
from Bennett Marine Video
(bennettmarine.com):
Back to the Basics of Boating
Back to the Basics: Improve Your Boating
Skills and Knowledge
Back to the Basics: What to Do When
Things Go Wrong
Boating Basics for First-Time Boaters
The Encyclopedia of Boating Tips
On-the-Water Boating Tips
100 Boating Mistakes and How to
Avoid Them
Top 60 Tips: Boat Handling
Organizations and Websites
National Association of State
Boating Law Administrators
(NASBLA)
www.nasbla.org
National On-Water Standards
(NOWS)
www.onwaterstandards.org
National Safe Boating Council
www.safeboatingcouncil.org
North American Safe Boating
Campaign
www.safeboatingcampaign.com
U.S. Coast Guard Auxiliary
www.cgaux.org
U.S. Coast Guard Boating Safety
Resource Center
www.uscgboating.org
U.S. Sailing Association
1 Roger Williams University Way
Bristol, RI 02809
www.ussailing.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women volunteers serving on
the National Merit Badge Subcommittee
and the National Aquatics
Subcommittee for the improvements
made in updating this pamphlet.
Scouting America would also like
to thank the many men and women of
various agencies who have worked to
develop the National On-Water
Standards – Power. These voluntary
standards have and will continue to
guide the Aquatics Task Force in its
effort to improve and revise this merit
badge.
Photo and Illustration Credits
David Bell, courtesy—page 18
(Type I life jacket)
Insect Images, courtesy; photo
by Stephen Ausmus, USDA
Agricultural Research Service
—page 72
Insect Images, courtesy; photo by
Chris Evans, University of Georgia
—page 73
Insect Images, courtesy; photo by
Brian Lockhart, USDA Forest
Service—page 74 (flood scene)


MOTORBOATING 79
.Motorboating Resources
MasterCraft Boat Company, courtesy—
cover (inboard motorboat)
Mercury Marine, courtesy—cover
(outboard motorboat)
K. Gregory Tucker, courtesy—pages 36,
49, and 67
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
Forest Service, Toiyabe National
Forest, courtesy—page 22
(map background)
All other photos and illustrations
not mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting America.
Jack Brown—page 13 (water bottle)
Dan Bryant—cover (type III life jacket)
and pages 6 (type III life jacket) and
18 (type III life jacket)
John McDearmon— all illustrations
pages 14, 23–26, 29, 30, 32, 33,
51–55, 57–58, 60–62, and 68
Brian Payne—page 18 (Type II and Type
IV devices)


