NATURE
STEM-Based


NATURE
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Nature or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35922
ISBN 978-0-8395-3285-9
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note: In most cases, all specimens should be returned to the wild at the
location of original capture after the requirements have been met. Check with
your merit badge counselor for those instances where the return of these
specimens would not be appropriate.
Under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, some plants and animals
are or may be protected by federal law. The same ones and/or others may
be protected by state law. Be sure that you do not collect protected species.
Your state may require that you purchase and carry a license to collect
certain species. Check with the wildlife and fish and game officials in your
state regarding species regulations before you begin to collect.


NATURE 3


4 NATURE
Note to the Counselor
Thank you for your commitment to sharing nature with
Scouting youth. Your engagement as a Nature merit badge
counselor will surely help young people gain a greater
appreciation for the natural world and might set a Scout on a
path to a future career in natural resources management,
environmental studies, earth science, or a life-long passion for
nature and the outdoors.
The Nature merit badge attempts to take a broad look at
the living and non-living components of the environment.
Scouts who show a particular interest in the topics discussed
should be encouraged to pursue a more in-depth study of these
topics through other merit badges, including Reptile and
Amphibian Study, Mammal Study, Insect Study, Bird Study,
Plant Science, Forestry, Fishing, Soil and Water Conservation,
Geology, or Environmental Science, to name a few.
Additionally, in your engagement with Scouts, please help
them to recognize that there is a balance between the value of
collecting and observing specimens for nature study and the
importance of adhering to the principles of outdoor ethics,
including respecting wildlife and leaving what you find in the
environment. The Leave No Trace Seven Principles and the
Outdoor Code are part of any nature study.
And finally, a word about safety. As Scouts work on the
Nature merit badge requirements, they might encounter hazards
associated with exposure to stinging insects, reptiles, and the
environment. Before counseling Scouts, counselors are strongly
encouraged to become familiar with the Guide to Safe Scouting,
a helpful planning tool for all Scouting volunteers. This valuable
resource provides an overview of Scouting policies and
procedures. Find it at www.scouting.org/health-and-safety/gss/.
Additionally, you can learn more about safety precautions by
following Scouting America's SAFE Checklist, available at www.
scouting.org/health-and-safety/safe/.


NATURE 5
Contents
Wildlife Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Birds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Mammals . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Reptiles and Amphibians . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Insects and Spiders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Fish . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Mollusks and Crustaceans . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 58
Plants . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Soil and Rocks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .65
Nature Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .69


6 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
Wildlife Communities
Take a look around you. Are you inside your home or some
other building that is made in part from wood? Are you outside
where trees and other plants are important features of the
landscape? Are your clothes made of cotton, wool, or leather?
Did your breakfast include fruit or fruit juice? Cereal? Bacon
and eggs? Milk?
Your cotton or wool clothing and your food come directly
from plants or from animals that eat plants. Your home is made
partly of wood, which is cut from another form of plants—trees.
Your campsite is surrounded by plants of many types. Plants also
produce the oxygen you need to breathe. You may never have
paid much attention, but plants are very important in your life.
In much the same way, all other animal life is dependent
on plants, and those plants depend on the soil. You could think
of a plant as a type of factory that uses sunlight as power, and
water and minerals from the soil as raw materials to make the
food you need or the food that cows or sheep convert into milk,
meat, leather, or wool for your use.
Even the largest animals are dependent on the soil
for life. The way larger animals are linked to the soil
through other small animals is called a food
chain. The chain starts in the soil. There
plants begin to sprout, drawing on the
sun’s energy to combine carbon dioxide,
water, and minerals from the soil to make
their own food. And the plants become
food for many kinds of animals, from the
tiniest worm or insect to the large deer.
American chestnut


NATURE 7
.Wildlife Communities
For example, imagine a patch of clover, a favorite of some
insects and animals, growing in a meadow. The clover blossoms
are visited by a butterfly, and as it sips the nectar it suddenly is
seized by a shrew, the smallest mammal in America and one
of the hungriest. The tiny shrew makes short work of the but-
terfly and goes on the prowl again for something to satisfy its
huge appetite.
But the shrew is careless, and suddenly it is pounced
upon by a weasel looking for a quick meal.
The food chain progresses from the soil to the plant to a
small animal to a larger animal and back to the soil—in this
case with the death of the weasel, whose remains decay and
nutrients return to the soil to be utilized by plants.
The plants that will grow in a particular wildlife commu-
nity are dependent on that area’s soil and climate. Under the
influence of the region’s soil and
climate, plant life develops into
different plant communities
such as a forest, a marsh,
a desert, or a prairie. These
in turn support the wild-
life community that
lives there.
This very close
connection between
the soil, the plants,
and all animal life
is part of the web of
nature. Each strand
of the web depends
on the other strands.
The soil nurtures the
plants. As they die
and decay, the plants
enrich the soil. The
animals must have
the plants to live. And
when the animals die,
their bodies decompose
and help to make the
soil more fertile.
PLANT-EATER
PLANT- AND
ANIMAL-EATER
FLESH-EATER
DEATH
DECOMPOSERS
BASIC
NUTRIENTS
PLANTS
Terrestrial food chain


8 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
The Importance of the Soil
The foundation of any wildlife community, whether on land
or in the water, is the soil. If the soil is fertile, it will produce
a flourishing plant growth. This will support a vigorous and
abundant population of animals.
There are many different kinds of soil, and each will
encourage different types of plant growth. To begin studying
different soils on the land, first note whether the surface layer
is sand, clay, or an in-between mixture called loam.
Sandy Soil. Water, wind, and weather conditions like frost can
break rocks into tiny particles. When enough of these particles
are gathered together, the result is sand. Sandy soil generally is
not very rich in the minerals plants need to grow; consequently,
pure sand does not support lush plant growth. Decayed plant
and animal matter, or humus, contributes nitrogen and other
elements to the soil. Thus, sandy soil that contains humus will
be better suited for plant life.
Clay Soil. Clay particles are so small that you cannot see them
individually, even under a microscope, and they tend to pack
together. Clay generally is rich in minerals and holds water
well, making it well-suited for most plant growth.
A good soil is rich
in humus. It holds
water and plant
foods. Nitrogen,
phosphorus, and
potassium are the
primary nutrients
found in soil that
are essential for
plant growth.


NATURE 9
.Wildlife Communities
However, if soil particles
are packed together too
tightly or hold too much
water, the seeds and roots
of some plants will not
get enough air.
Loam. Sand mixed with
clay is called loam. Most
loam soils also contain
particles called silt, which
are smaller than sand but
larger than clay. Silt loam
is loam that contains a lot of silt. Loam soils are better for
cultivation than sand or clay.
The water that flows from the soil also will carry dissolved
minerals, a natural fertilizer that will permit a healthy growth
of plants in the water. This will be the basis of the aquatic
food chain and of populations of such animals as crustaceans,
insects, fish, and terrestrial (land dwelling) animals like
raccoons and otters, which depend in part on water life for
their food.
The Importance of Climate
The weather’s impact on soil formation and on vegetation
affects which plants will exist in a particular area. An area’s
average temperature and rainfall determine which plants will
grow there.
Warm climates encourage rapid decay of plant and animal
life, which results in a higher humus content. Richer soils are
loamy, well-supplied with humus, and nearly level. Lowlands
along river bottoms usually have deep, rich soils. Sloping land
can be highly fertile and as productive as level land, but water
is likely to run off and carry the rich soil with it. Areas where
rainfall is low tend to have rich soil because the minerals have
not been leached away, but plants may not be able to fully use
these nutrients because of the limited water.
Certain plants grow well in warm climates but cannot
exist in a cold environment, and some plants can grow only
in cooler climates. For example, cabbage palms, live oaks, and
certain cacti grow in warm climates, while balsam fir, aspens,
and spruces grow only where winters are cold.


10 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
Altitude also affects plant life: The higher you go, generally
the colder the temperature and the higher the rainfall. As far as
plants are concerned, going up the side of a mountain is much
the same as going north. Going up 300 to 500 feet of altitude is
roughly equivalent to moving northward one degree of latitude
(68 miles). So, the same plants will grow at a higher elevation
in the South than in the North. Trees that will not grow at 4,000
feet in one place might grow at 6,000 feet farther south.
In the same way
that plants have
soil requirements,
they have require-
ments of
temperature
range—from
hot to cold.
So critical are the
forces that affect
wildlife communities—
soil, temperature,
rainfall, and altitude—
that an experienced
naturalist can tell
you what plants and
animals can and
can’t be found there,
if these factors
are known.


NATURE 11
.Wildlife Communities
Some forces can change or influence the wildlife community
relatively quickly. Windstorms, floods, drainage, and fire might
destroy a community or create a new one. These same influences
also might cause sudden growth of certain insects or populations,
thus causing more damage and costing much in control efforts.
In some places, sudden windstorms such as hurricanes or
tornadoes might blow down trees and thus change the nature
of the community. When trees are blown down, more sunlight
reaches the ground and low-growing plants that don’t thrive in
the shade. The introduction of sunlight allows shade-intolerant
plants to germinate, become established, and develop, which
changes the plant community. It will take some years for seed-
ling trees to grow and shade out these shrubs.
Steadily blowing wind is a long-range influence in places
such as mountaintops, seacoasts, and deserts. The constant
power of the wind causes trees to grow gnarled and bent
instead of straight and tall. Other plants that normally grow
tall also hug the ground because of the wind.
Water as a Wildlife Community
Just as a forest, prairie, desert, or marsh supports a particular
type of wildlife community, so does a pond, lake, stream, river,
bay, or ocean. Many of the same forces help determine what
kinds of plants grow in water and, in turn, these plants help to
determine what kinds of animals will be found.
Like plants on dry land, water plants need light to manufac-
ture food. That is why the most luxuriant plant growth—pickerel
weed, cattails, bulrushes, wild rice, arrowroot, or pond lilies—are
found in shallow water where the leaves can obtain pure sunlight.
Strange as it
might seem, a
storm that blows
down all or many
of the trees in
an area might
help increase
some wildlife
populations.
Where plant life
is affected by
the wind, animal
life differs, too.
Animals usually
will seek protec-
tion from the wind.
What Makes Water Plants Grow
• The amount of water and the stability of the water level
• Water depth and clarity
• Water temperature
• The speed of water flow
• The kind of floor the body of water possesses
• The minerals in the water and in the soil beneath
• The condition of the land surrounding the water
• Whether the water is fresh, salt, or brackish


12 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
Where the water is too deep for rooted
plants, microscopic floating plant-like
organisms take over. What these
phytoplankton lack in size they make up
for in numbers. A single drop of water
can hold thousands of them. Living
on these tiny organisms are equally
tiny animals called zooplankton.
Together the planktons form the base
of the ocean food chain that supports
animals as large as whales.
While plankton is important in
the food chain of water animals, rooted
plants are important to them for both
food and shelter. The kind of floor beneath
a body of water helps determine which plants
will grow there. Muddy bottoms usually will support
plants different from those supported by rock, gravel, or sand
bottoms. Some hard clay bottoms might not support plants
at all.
Water movement also affects plant life. Delicate, long-
stemmed plants like pickerelweed and lilies grow well in lakes
or ponds, where the water moves slowly. In swiftly running
streams or rivers, you would find low-growing or ribbonlike
plants able to withstand the fast current. Generally, mosses and
algae are found on the rocks in fast-moving water.
Temperature, too, is important to plant life in the water. If
the temperature of water is very cold or covered with ice, plant
growth is slowed. Sunlight, oxygen, and carbon dioxide cannot
penetrate the ice and reach the plants, and these plants remain
inactive most of the year.
The condition of the land surrounding a pond, lake, or
stream is critical to aquatic life. Plankton need minerals to live.
Minerals get into water through rainwater that drains off the
land watershed into ponds or streams. If this land has been
farmed out, burned over, or in some way exhausted of minerals,
then the water is not as likely to contain the minerals required
by plankton and other plants and animals.
In places where
the water level
varies because of
spring floods and
summer droughts,
the plants along
the edge will be
different from a
place where the
water level is
the same the
year-round.
Humpback whale


NATURE 13
.Wildlife Communities
Salt Water
A few plants will grow in both freshwater and salt water, but
relatively few freshwater plants can tolerate any salt in the
water. For instance, salt marshes are periodically flooded
with salt water, and only plants that will tolerate salt water
can grow there.
The most obvious plants growing in salt water are the
seaweeds that anchor to rocks or shells, or grow on sandy or
muddy bottoms. Water temperature and movement determine
which of these plants will grow there, just as in freshwater. A
few will grow in both cold and warm water. Some of the more
common seaweeds are sea lettuce, bladder wrack, the kelps,
gulfweed, Ceylon moss, Irish moss, and rockweed.
Plants in the Wildlife Community
One thing all plants have in common is that they are
constantly subject to change. In nature, change typically is a
gradual process interspersed with occasional abrupt, drastic
changes such as a forest fire, too many animals grazing in one
area, or clearing the land for a highway. When the vegetation of
a plant community is all or partially removed, the community
will gradually rebuild itself.
Some plants are
so sensitive to salt
that they cannot
grow where salt
spray reaches
them.
Some seaweeds grow only in shallow water where
they are exposed by low tide. Others grow in water
that is 100 or more feet deep. Still others grow from
the low-tide line to fairly deep water.


14 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
When seeds are blown into the bare soil, annual plants
such as common garden or roadside weeds will begin to spring
up. Perennial plants and grasses might get started at the same
time, and they soon will crowd out the annuals. Then depend-
ing upon the climate and other conditions, grasses will grow
more dominant or shrubs and trees will take over. Sometimes
these stages are cut short, especially if there is a good seed
year and such trees as birch or white pine are nearby.
In the Northeast, for example, shrubs like the sumac
might grow, along with gray birch, black cherry, and aspen.
Their leaves would enrich the soil, and as the trees grow they
would shade the ground. Other trees such as the red maple
and oak can get started under these steady conditions. In some
parts of the Northeast, the oak would remain as the dominant
species of tree, but in other areas, the oak would, in time,
give way to beech and sugar maple. Under their denser shade,
nothing but their own seedlings would grow. This then would
be the last stage in the succession, a climax forest.
In the grasslands of the Midwest, much the same thing
would happen. First, annual plants would dominate the bare
soil, then perennials and grasses. But instead of trees moving in,
grasses would remain as the final stage. In the Rocky Mountain
area, trees would form the last step in the succession, but trees
such as pine, spruce, and fir would dominate instead of the
hardwood of the East. This process of plants replacing each
other as each creates certain conditions favorable to the growth
of the next stage is called plant succession. The last stage to
grow naturally in any area is called the climax community.
With few
exceptions,
most of the plant
communities
you will see have
been greatly
modified. The few
areas that remain
unmodified, such
as wilderness
areas, continue to
provide valuable
information about
how natural
systems evolve
as part of the
ecosystem. They
are among our
most valuable
natural history
possessions.


NATURE 15
.Wildlife Communities
When the climax community has been reached, no other
plants can replace that growth unless the climate changes
or disaster strikes—wind, fire, volcanic actions, flooding,
or human actions. In this event, the same processes might
repeat themselves to create a similar plant community, or new
disturbances might create the conditions for another community.
Water-to-Forest Succession
Many climax forests and prairies now stand where there was
once a pond, lake, or beaver-dammed stream. In almost the
same way that bare soil will finally be replaced by the area’s
climax growth, plant life may overtake water and the area
would become a forest or prairie.
Briefly, this is what happens. First, only water and a
mineral bottom exist. As the plants that live in the water or
along the shore grow and die over many years, a layer of
organic material forms at the bottom of the pond. Finally, a
bed of organic matter and mineral debris washes down from
the surrounding land, replacing the pond water, and a bed of
peat reaches the surface. When suitable soil has formed, other
plants, like sedges or cattails, grow and form a mat. As these
plants grow and die, they help build up the soil so that still
other plants can grow.
Next come the grasses and sedges that form sod. As they
grow, they form solid soil. Eventually they will move out over
the peat, and the peat will develop farther out toward the center
of the pond.
Because climate
changes and
disasters are a
normal part of
nature, the wildlife
community is
dynamic, always
changing here
and there, but
continually
moving toward
the climax stage.
Water-to-forest succession
Water level
Climax WATER GRASS AND
SEDGES
SWAMP SHRUB
AND LOWLAND
GRASSES
FOREST
When a prairie is the climax, the final stage will succeed the lowland
prairie grass stage. Where a forest is the climax, trees such as elm, ash,
or red maple succeed the swamp shrubs.


16 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
Sod-forming plants can grow in soil that is dryer than what
the first two groups of plants need. When the sod-formers have
helped build up a suitable soil, and a sufficient amount of water
has been replaced, still different plants will grow. These plants
might be swamp shrubs or lowland prairie grasses, depending
on the climax.
Animals in the Wildlife Community
From microscopic species in the soil, through insects, worms,
and other animals beneath the surface, to mammals such as
woodchucks and ground squirrels that nest underground, to
insects, reptiles, birds, and mammals that live on the surface
and up into the highest trees, all animals live in close relation
to one another and to plants.
Many animals eat plants. Insects eat grasses or tree leaves,
or live under the bark of trees where they find food; reptiles
such as certain species of turtles and lizards live mainly on
plants; some fish eat plant life in the water; birds eat fruits,
seeds, and buds; mammals such as squirrels eat seeds; wild
deer eat acorns, twigs, and tree leaves and buds.
Animals might also eat other animals. Some insects eat
other insects; some snakes, turtles, and lizards, as well as
amphibious frogs and salamanders, eat insects, while other
snakes eat small mammals. Some fish eat insects or smaller
fish. There are birds that eat insects, fish, mammals, and
other birds. Some mammals eat insects, snakes, fish, birds,
or smaller mammals.
In each case, the animal contributes to
the health of the wildlife community. For
example, rodents in a grassland area eat the
grasses. Hawks, owls, foxes, and coyotes feed
on rodents and help keep rodent populations
at moderate levels. Birds such as woodpeckers,
bluebirds, flycatchers, and warblers eat insects
that in excessive numbers may be harmful
to trees.
Woodchuck (groundhog)


NATURE 17
.Wildlife Communities
A Balanced Wildlife Community
The expression “balance of nature” refers to the relationships
between animals and their environment and among animals
within that environment.
In the natural arrangement of things, prey animals live on
plentiful plant foods and they have lots of young—far more than
can survive for very long. This overproduction, or population
surplus, is largely to feed the flesh-eaters, called predators.
Because they eat the overproduced animals, predators do
not reduce their food supply much. And, because they help to
keep the population of plant-eaters within reasonable limits,
the herbivores do not destroy their own food supply.
In other words, one thing tends to balance another to keep
the system operating. The numbers of predators are partly deter-
mined by the ease with which they can obtain food and rear
their young. When the flesh-eaters have had easy living for a
while and their populations build up, another “control” enters
the picture. Under high population density, disease spreads
readily, reducing the population.
The numbers of animals perpetually fluctuate with the
annual cycle of the seasons and from year to year. First one spe-
cies is plentiful and then another. But it all happens within certain
limits, and for that reason the balance of nature is a real thing.
Otherwise communities of plants and animals could not survive.
In our human communities, almost every person has
responsibilities that in some way affect others. Some people
raise food. Others raise animals or plants that provide us with
clothing. Still others work to provide us with homes, education,
good health, electricity, transportation, and all other products or
services we need in everyday living. We all depend on someone
else for those things we cannot make or do for ourselves.
Each plant and
animal in a wildlife
community has a
function or role in
that community,
and the welfare of
all depends on the
continued interac-
tion of each of
these to keep the
community
in balance.
HIPPO
The World Wildlife Fund uses the acronym HIPPO to summarize the
leading causes of why a species becomes endangered.
H = Habitat loss
I = Introduced (invasive) species
P = Pollution
P = Population growth (of humans)
O = Overconsumption (in industrialized nations)


18 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
Animal Succession
Every animal has its own requirements for food, cover, and
water. Several kinds of animals might eat the same food,
but their other needs will differ. Or, they might have similar
requirements for cover, but they will eat different food.
Probably the easiest way to illustrate this is to review plant
succession and note that each stage of the succession will
support different animals. Let’s start with bare ground and see
what typical animals might be associated with each stage.
Stages of Succession on Land
Bare Soil. Because there is nothing to eat, very few animals
are found at this stage.
Early Grassland. This stage is characterized by pioneering
plant species, typically annual plants that grow from seed,
flower, and reseed in a single year.
Late Grassland. In this stage, such plants as broom sedge,
quack grass, asters, goldenrod, pokeweed, and poverty cat
grass might support a few nesting birds. An occasional pheas-
ant or quail might feed on seeds, and winter birds such as the
tree sparrow, snow bunting, or junco might find food. Rabbits
and meadow mice can find food and cover.
In nature, every
wildlife community
supports a
different group
of animals. City
dwellers are
different from
those in a forest,
those found in
a city park are
different from
those in a desert,
and animals
around a farm or
ranch are
different from
those in a marsh
or swamp.
Ring-necked pheasant


NATURE 19
.Wildlife Communities
Prairie Subclimax. When plants such as
Kentucky bluegrass and clover move in and
form a sod cover, the area becomes better
suited for animals. Insects will make their
home there, which will attract insect-eating
birds. Cover is available for birds like the
meadowlark, which will then nest. Food and
cover also are available for rabbits and many
rodents. Consequently, food is provided for
animals such as foxes or hawks, which will
feed on the small mammals and birds.
Prairie Climax. If grass is the climax growth,
the next (and final) stage, consisting of long-
lived perennial grasses, will supply food and
nesting cover for several other animals. Now
other species of prairie birds, such as the
upland plover and grasshopper sparrows, can
be found. Jackrabbits, ground squirrels, bad-
gers, coyotes, and red foxes might also move in because they
will find food and shelter there. But generally, the subclimax
supports more animal life than pure stands of climax growth.
Shrub Stage. If forest is the climax growth, a shrub stage
will succeed the perennial weed or grass stage. Birds such as
the chipping sparrow, cardinal, and indigo bunting will nest
among shrubs like sumac, sassafras, witch hazel, and prickly
ash. Bees will nest in the ground, and typical shrub insects like
damsel bugs and assassin bugs will be
found. Cottontail rabbits will find cover
they need, as will bobwhite quail.
Subclimax Tree Stage. As larger trees
replace the shrubs, still other animals
will be found. Tree-nesting birds like
blue jays, cuckoos, crows, flickers,
flycatchers, warblers, and hawks will
be found. Insects that live under tree
bark or in deadwood will find food and
homes for the first time. Mammals such
as deer, squirrels, opossums, raccoons,
and bears can find suitable food and
cover for their needs.
Red fox
Prairie warbler


20 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
Climax Forest. Although some of the same animals found at the
subclimax tree stage also will be found in climax forests, many
of them will be replaced by animals that find more favorable
conditions in the climax forest.
Stages of Succession in Water
Much like the way particular land animals are found at certain
stages of succession, certain types of animals are associated with
each stage of succession in water.
Open Water. In open water, few animals are seen. There
might be fish such as bass, and down deep there might be
lake trout. A few diving ducks, such as mergansers, might
find food there. An osprey might catch a fish near the surface
of the water. Animals such as clams or mussels might be
found on the bottom.
Submerged Plant Stage. In shallower water, plants such
as algae and pond weed will live and provide food for more
animals. Insect larvae live on these plants and provide food
for fish such as sunfish or crappie. Bass also will be found
here because they feed on small sunfish and insects.
Floating Plant Stage. In this stage, water lilies and smart
weeds grow. Fish will find food and shelter among the under-
water stems, and frogs might be seen on lily pads or in the
water. Such birds as herons find food here.
Reed Marsh Stage.
When cattails, bulrushes,
and reeds grow, the
pond has become more
of a marsh than a pond.
Mammals such as
muskrats now find food
and cover; red-winged
blackbirds, yellow-headed
blackbirds, coots, rails,
and some ducks will
nest. Mink will be at
home here because
there is plentiful animal
life on which to feed.
Mallard hen


NATURE 21
.Wildlife Communities
Sedge Meadow Stage. When sedges, rushes, and spike
rushes take over, the succession has become a sedge meadow.
Here bobolinks will find food and nesting sites, and marsh
hawks or short-eared owls search out mice for food. The next
stage may be prairie or shrub, and the associated animals will
closely resemble the succession from bare ground to forest or
prairie climax.
How Humans Affect the
Wildlife Community
Humans sometimes affect wildlife communities in obvious ways.
Marshes might be drained for agriculture, housing developments,
or airport construction; large areas might be flooded by dams. In
the process, a wildlife community with its distinctive plant and
animal life is destroyed and another is created, although it is no
longer natural.
Forests might be cut to provide timber, chemicals, paper
pulp, or other products needed in everyday life. Carelessness
might cause fires that destroy forests and the animals that live
in them. These events set back the wildlife community to an
earlier state of succession.
Prairies might be plowed for agriculture to grow more food
for people. But many of the animals and plants that can live
only on the prairie will disappear from these areas.
To some extent, wildlife communities also can be created.
Farm ponds, farm marshes, hedgerows between cultivated fields,
shrubby roadsides, and similar projects are, in a sense, wildlife
communities that might not have existed in the area before but,
after being created by people, become homes for wildlife.
Humans also affect wildlife communities in less obvious
ways. We might upset the balance of a community and affect
Sometimes trees are cut down to create better habitat for species
that are hunted. Harvesting Aspen trees allows sunlight to reach the
forest floor, promoting aspen roots to resprout and other sun-loving
plants like raspberries to grow. These changes are preferred by white-
tailed deer and grouse, increasing their numbers. By implementing
a forest management plan, wildlife biologist attempt to create early
successional forests that benefit hunted and nonhunted species that
prefer them.


22 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
the plants and animals that live there. In a lake, for example,
anglers may catch only the bass, leaving too few bass to eat the
surplus bluegills. There soon will be so many bluegills that
there is not enough food for them. Then the pond will contain
only bluegills too small to catch and a few large bass that
won’t go after bait or lures because they will have enough food.
In the meantime, the bluegills will eat bass eggs, so the bass
cannot multiply.
In another example, it might appear that hawks or foxes
are killing all the pheasants or quail in an area. Although the
logical solution might appear to be to eliminate many of the
hawks or foxes, this will not necessarily increase the number
of pheasants or quail. If there is not enough of the right kind
of food and cover for the birds, their numbers will not increase
anyway. Enough food and cover might help the bird population
grow, even with foxes and hawks in the area.
Without the foxes and hawks, meadow mice might over-
run the area and eat not only the crops, but also much of the
food that pheasants need. The populations of other animals
that are eaten by the hawks and foxes will also increase. The
wildlife community will thus be out of balance, and all forms
of life affected.
Endangered Species
As civilization expands, it encroaches on areas used
by wildlife. Also, of course, people who hunt and
fish have reduced native populations. In the past,
when “market” hunting was allowed, it caused
massive destruction of wildlife populations.
Today, game management helps control hunting
in the United States so that the sport has not been
responsible for putting certain species on the threat-
ened or endangered lists.
A wildlife
community can
be destroyed
through the
introduction of
exotic or foreign
species, foreign
diseases, pests,
bounties on
predators,
and similar
human acts.
The ivory-billed woodpecker, thought to
have been extinct in the United States since
the 1940s, has recently been rediscovered.
Visual sightings and audio recordings by
scientists in 2004 and 2005 suggest that indi-
vidual birds may still exist in a few remote
areas in Arkansas and possibly Florida.Ivory-billed
woodpeckers


NATURE 23
.Wildlife Communities
Domestic Animals
Because domestic animals are raised for food, clothing, or
recreation, their influence on wildlife communities is part of
how humans affect the environment.
Cattle, sheep, and horses all feed on plant life, especially
grasses that are cultivated just for their use. But just as the
food supply in a wildlife community limits the number of
animals that can live there, the plant life in an area where
domestic animals graze limits the number of animals that the
land can support. Too many animals can eat the grass down
to where it weakens and dies. This overgrazing can destroy a
community in which wild animals also live, so that wild birds
and mammals that live there have no food or cover. The ani-
mals will starve, or the rancher must supply more food.
In some places, cattle or sheep grazing in forested land
has a harmful effect on plants and wild animals. Cattle or
sheep eat too much of the ground cover and, by walking over
the ground day after day, pack the earth so that water cannot
penetrate the soil. When it rains, the water runs off quickly,
taking soil with it. This washes into streams, making them
unsuited for fish. Floods might occur if too much rain falls.
When breeding
populations can
no longer keep up
with causes of
death, certain
species become
endangered and
might become
extinct. Once
extinct, a species
can never be
reproduced and it
is lost forever.
Our state and national park systems and the efforts of
many private groups are evidence of our attempt to
preserve wildlife communities. But the pressure of a
growing population makes it increasingly difficult to
keep these areas natural.
You can find out what plants and animals are
protected in your state by contacting your state’s
natural resources department, or by visiting the U.S.
Fish and Wildlife Service website: ecos.fws.gov/ecos/
indexPublic.do.
Where overgrazing has occurred—that is, where domestic animals have
destroyed the original plant life and the ability of the soil to produce
grass of a high quality—the nature of the community changes.


24 NATURE
Wildlife Communities.
Meanwhile, the forest and animal life are both harmed.
Lack of ground cover reduces food and shelter for species that
might die-off or move away. Packed earth prevents water from
reaching tree roots, slowing the growth of the trees. Seedlings
and other ground cover are eaten or damaged by the domestic
animals, resulting in the loss of new trees to replace the large
trees.
Look Along the Edges
As you observe wildlife communities, you will discover that the
best places to find animals are where two communities meet.
This “edge” produces more wildlife than either of the communi-
ties. Here, you will find a greater variety of plants, which sup-
ply more food and more cover for more animals.
For example, rabbits find food in fields where clover grows.
But they need tangle or brush for cover from their enemies.
Where a field meets a shrubby wood, rabbits have food and
cover close together and therefore can live successfully.
However, even though a greater variety of wildlife can
be found along the edge, some animals avoid the edges and
require large stretches of a certain type of terrain, such as an
unbroken forest.
Where a prairie
meets a wood-
land, where a
hayfield meets a
cornfield, where a
marsh blends into
woods, or wher-
ever two com-
munities come
together, you
will find a larger
variety
of animals.
When invasive (nonnative) species are introduced to
an area, they compete and—over time—often overtake
native species. Invasive species can ultimately throw
off the delicate balance of the wildlife community.


NATURE 25
.Wildlife Communities
The Leave No Trace Seven Principles
Do your part to keep nature natural by following these principles.
1. Plan ahead and prepare. Proper planning and preparation increases safety,
reduces the impact of your visit on the environment, and helps make your
outdoor experience more enjoyable.
2. Travel and camp on durable surfaces. Natural environments are easily
damaged by foot traffic. Use existing trails or travel on durable surfaces such
as rock, gravel, sand, compacted soil, dry grasses, or snow. Large groups
should spread out to avoid creating new trails. Keep campsites small.
3. Dispose of waste properly (pack it in, pack it out). Any material people
leave behind pollutes the environment and might create a health hazard for
wildlife or other visitors. Pack out any trash and leftover food. Dispose of
human waste by digging catholes 6 to 8 inches deep and 200 feet away from
water, trails, and campsites.
4. Leave what you find. Observe the interesting things you find, but do not
disturb them. Use established campsites and do not alter them in any way.
Restore campsites to pristine condition before you leave.
5. Minimize campfire impacts. Use a lightweight stove when cooking in the
backcountry. If you need to build a fire, keep it small and use only dead or
downed wood. Never cut down limbs or trees for firewood.
6. Respect wildlife. Stay far enough away from animals that your presence
does not disturb their natural activity. Store food, food scraps, and trash
securely to prevent animals from eating food that is not part of their natural
diet. Never feed wild animals.
7. Be considerate of other visitors. Let everyone enjoy nature. Travel and
camp quietly and away from other people. Blend in by wearing subdued col-
ors. Leave pets and portable audio devices at home.
©Leave No Trace, www.LNT.org
The Outdoor Code
As an American, I will do my best to —
• Be clean in my outdoor manners.
• Be careful with fire.
• Be considerate in the outdoors.
• Be conservation minded.





NATURE 27
.Birds
Birds
The best way to learn to identify birds is to venture outside and
look and listen for them. If your counselor or someone else who
knows birds can go with you, so much the better. If not, your
task will be more difficult, but you can do it by yourself. First,
borrow a pair of binoculars or field glasses. They will make bird
watching much more fun and identification much easier.
Next, learn something about bird families and where they
usually are found. For example, if you wanted to see ducks,
you would look at a body of water. If you wanted to see wood-
peckers, you would look in trees. If you wanted to see meadow-
larks or killdeers, you would look in fields or meadows.
When just beginning to bird-watch, first try to place a bird
in the correct family grouping. Determining the species will
then be easier. Generally, the common birds you will see may
be placed in one of the following groups.
Wading Birds. Herons, egrets, and bitterns are
in this group of birds, which have long legs,
long necks, and long, pointed bills. You
usually see them wading in shallow water
watching for small fish.
Waterfowl. Ducks and geese are in this
group and usually are seen on or near
water or marshes. Ducks are divided
into two groups: those that feed by
tipping up and dabbling in shallow
water and those that dive for food.
When looking at
birds, always try
to have the sun at
your back. When
the sun shines
on the bird from
behind you or
from a slight side
angle, you can see
any color clearly.
Otherwise, all you
might see is a
black silhouette
in a treetop or
floating on a pond.
Great blue heron


Birds.
Birds of Prey. Hawks, vultures, and eagles
are in this group of generally large birds.
They have hooked beaks and strong feet
and feed on small animals such as mice
and rats, amphibians, snakes, fish, and
other birds. You usually see them soaring
overhead or perched in a snag from which
they watch for prey.
Grouse and Quail. These are birds that
somewhat resemble chickens. Some are
found in brushy areas, others in fields or
prairies. Prairie chicken, ruffed grouse,
spruce grouse, and sage hens are in this
group. Quail are smaller than grouse and
are easily distinguished from them. These
birds usually are seen on the ground.
Shore Birds. This is a group of small wading birds found
along streams, ponds, or the seashore. Some kinds live in fields
and prairies. They have long, probing bills and probe for small
water animals or grubs in the soil. Sandpipers, killdeer, snipe,
and woodcock are in this group.
Gulls and Terns. These are long-winged, strong flying birds
found near large bodies of freshwater or salt water. Gulls
usually feed on the surface, while terns dive for their food.
Herring gulls, ring-billed gulls, western gulls, California gulls,
black terns, common terns, and least terns are probably the
most common birds in this group.
28 NATURE
Common tern
Harris’ hawk


NATURE 29
.Birds
Woodpeckers. Flickers, sap-
suckers, and red-headed, downy,
and red-bellied woodpeckers
probably are the most common
birds in this group. They usually
are seen climbing tree trunks
and probing the bark for insects.
In flight, they flap several times
then pause, which gives them an
up-and-down sort of flight.
Flycatchers. These birds gener-
ally perch on bare twigs or power
lines, once in a while flying off to
catch an insect. While perched, they sit quite still, occasionally
jerking their tails. King birds, phoebes, and flycatchers are the
most common birds in this group.
Swallows. These are smallish birds with long, slender wings
seen most often as they fly gracefully over fields or water,
chasing insects. Tree swallows, barn swallows, and martins
are members of this group.
Jays. In general, jays are birds of the woodlands, where their
large size, long tails, and bluish or gray color help identify
them. Blue jays and Florida jays are found in the East; magpies,
California jays, and Steller’s jays are found in the West.
Thrashers. This is a group of robin-sized birds with slen-
der bills, which generally curve downward. They are
seen on the ground or in low shrubs. Mockingbirds,
catbirds, and thrashers are in this group.
Thrushes. This group includes the robin, bluebird,
and thrush. With the exception of the bluebird,
all generally are brownish on the back and have
speckled breasts. They all are known for their
beautiful songs and usually are seen feeding
on the ground.
Warblers. These small, brightly colored, insect-
eating birds have fine bills and flitting habits. They
are birds of the woodlands, usually seen at the tops of
trees or at the tips of shrub branches. Some of them are
myrtle warblers, Audubon’s warblers, yellow warblers, and
black-and-white warblers.
American robin
Gila woodpecker


30 NATURE
Birds.
Meadowlarks, Blackbirds, and Orioles. These birds
are found in several wildlife communities: bobolinks,
meadowlarks, and cowbirds in fields; orioles in high
trees; grackles in marshes or woods; and redwings in
marshes. Most of them are brightly colored, and all
have distinctive songs.
Finches and Sparrows. Birds in this group all have
strong, cone-shaped bills adapted for crushing or
cracking seeds. They are found in almost all wildlife
communities. Cardinals, grosbeaks, sparrows, towhees,
and juncos are in this group.
The easiest way to learn bird songs is to watch a bird
while it sings, so you can immediately associate sight
with sound. Some birds, however, might be heard
and not seen. You can get help from someone else
or one of the recordings of bird calls listed at the end
of this pamphlet.
Learning about birds takes time. You will be sur-
prised, however, that recognizing birds is quite easy
and can become the basis of a lifelong hobby. There
are more than 700 types of birds to be seen in the
United States.
Western meadowlark
As you watch birds, find out as much as you can
about them. Noticing the following things about a
bird will help you recognize the species the next time
you see it:
• Its call
• Its song
• What it eats
• How it flies
• The trees or other
plants it favors for
perching and singing
• Where it nests
• Whether it walks
or hops
• Specific markings
such as an eye
stripe, wing bars,
and coloration


NATURE 31
.Birds
Nest Boxes
Many birds—among them bluebirds, wrens, tree swallows,
titmice, chickadees, and some ducks, hawks, and owls—nest
in holes in hollow trees, known as cavities. Unfortunately,
nest cavities are hard to find in many areas or have been taken
over by starlings and house sparrows. By building nest boxes
with properly sized holes, you can increase the populations of
native cavity-nesting birds. At the same time, you will exclude
invasive species such as starlings and house sparrows.
Eastern Bluebird Nest Box
Materials List
• Standard 1" X 6", 4 feet long
• Standard board 1" X 10",
101⁄2" long
• 13⁄4" galvanized screws,
approximately 20
• Two 13⁄4" galvanized
screws for pivot point
• One double-headed
nail for holding
door closed
The nest box plans have been provided by the North American Bluebird Society.
For more information about bluebirds and their conservation, visit the NABS
website: www.nabluebirdsociety.org.
PIVOT
SCREWS
DOUBLE-HEADED NAIL
DRILL HOLE THROUGH “FRONT”
AND SIDE OF DOOR TO HOLD
DOOR CLOSED WITH NAIL.
PIVOT
SCREWS
1⁄4" VENT
SIDE SIDE
SIDE SIDEFLOOR FRONT
USE THE REMAINDER
OF THE BOARD
FOR THE BACK.
DRAINAGE
CORNER CUTS
4"
4'
9 1⁄4" 9 3⁄8"10 1⁄4"
51⁄2"
80º
80º FRONT
ROOF
FLOOR BACK
6 1⁄2"
4"
ABOUT 1'13⁄4"
9 1⁄4"
9 1⁄2"
93⁄8"
10 1⁄4"
10 1⁄2"
11⁄2"


32 NATURE
Birds.
The most effective nest box design is an upright rectangle
with an overhanging roof and one hinged side for easy cleaning
(see the plan provided in this chapter). The size of the entrance
hole and overall dimensions of the box vary, depending on the
species you want to attract, although a box with a 19/16-inch
hole is ideal for a variety of birds, including bluebirds. Fancy or
unusual designs, like those that imitate human houses, generally
are not very effective or safe for birds.
Use 3/4-inch, untreated lumber, not particle board or metal.
Assemble the box using galvanized screws, which hold tighter
and longer than nails. Be sure to drill several 1/4-inch ventilation
holes around the top of the side and back walls, and several
more in the floor for drainage. It is not necessary to paint or
stain the finished box, although a coat of gray or light brown
stain or clear waterproof sealer will help preserve the wood.
Avoid dark colors, which will make the box too hot in the sun.
Do not paint the entrance hole or inside of the box. If the
lumber is smooth, use a sharp nail, rasp, or file to roughen the
inside of the front of the box so the fledglings can easily climb
to the hole. Saw kerfs may also be etched on the inside of the
front panel.
Bluebirds like nest boxes placed in open country with
low-cut grass and widely spaced trees and shrubs. Chickadees,
wrens, and titmice prefer woodlands. Mount the box on a steel
pole 6 feet off the ground. Wrap a 24-inch-wide metal cone
around the pole or cover the pole with grease to discourage
cats, raccoons, and other predators. Face the box away from the
prevailing wind and rain.
If you place more than one box, space them at least 300
feet apart so that birds of the same species will not fight over
territory. If you place boxes closer than this, be sure to observe
them carefully. Birds of the same species may fight over the
boxes, and you may need to move one. In other instances,
different species may use the boxes. In either case, this is a
great opportunity to learn how individual birds and different
species interact.
Clean out boxes in late winter, removing old nesting materi-
als, mouse nests, and other debris. During the nesting season,
check the box weekly. When the parents are absent, quickly
open the hinged side, count the eggs or chicks without disturb-
ing the nest or its residents, note anything unusual about the
nest materials, and record the results in your field notebook.
Do not put a perch
below the hole
in your bird box.
Native birds do
not need one, and
a perch makes
it easier for
house sparrows,
starlings, and
other predators to
attack the birds
nesting inside.
Do not build
apartment
boxes, except
for martins.


NATURE 33
.Birds
Then leave the area so the parents can return. Clean out the
boxes after each nesting, and then inspect again in early spring
prior to the nesting season.
Most songbird eggs hatch two weeks after the last egg is
laid, and the chicks are ready to leave the nest in 14 to 21 days.
Do not disturb the box during the last four or five days of this
period, or the young birds might leave before they are ready.
Other Nest Structures
Not all birds nest in tree cavities, but some of these
species also can benefit from human assistance.
Robins, phoebes, and barn swallows will nest on
square wooden platforms mounted beneath the
eaves of barns, sheds, or buildings, out of the wind
and rain. Mourning doves, which build flimsy nests,
will fledge more babies if you provide them with
shallow cones of metal hardware “cloth,” about 10
inches in diameter and wired into a crotch in the
branches of a dense tree like a pine.
Assembly: Cut the cloth into a 12-inch circle. Cut out a 21/2-inch pie piece from the
circle and wire the edges together to form a cone, as shown. Wire and/or staple
the cone securely into the crotch of a tree limb.
*This plan comes from the Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center. The NPWRC website can be
found at www.npwrc.usgs.gov.
Mourning Dove Nest Basket*
Materials and tools:
one 12-by-12-inch piece
of hardware cloth, wire,
staples, tin snips
12”
12”
21/2”
Barn swallow nest


34 NATURE
Birds.
Purple martins nest in colonies, usually in special
“apartment house” nest boxes, or in hollow gourds.
For more information on attracting martins, write
to the Purple Martin Conservation Association,
301 Peninsula Drive, Suite 6; Erie, PA 16505; or visit
its website at www.purplemartin.org.
Robin Nesting Shelter
Notes:
1. There is only one side.
2. Roof hangs over sides
and front.
3. To assemble:
a. Nail through back into floor
b. Nail through side into floor
and back
c. Nail through roof into side
and back.
Robins will nest in shelters made with one or more sides open.
7"
1⁄2" ALLOWANCE
FOR SAWCUTS
41⁄2"1⁄2" PLYWOOD
BACK ROOF SIDE FLOOR
7" 81⁄2"
281⁄2"
61⁄2" 6"
7"
11⁄2"


NATURE 35
.Birds
Water
One of the best ways to attract birds to your backyard is to
provide water. A simple, old-fashioned birdbath works well, as
long as you keep it clean by scrubbing it every day or two with
hot water and adding fresh water with a hose. You need only
the bowl from a birdbath or a shallow plastic dish like those
made to go under potted plants. Place the bowl directly on the
ground near escape cover such as trees or bushes. Put a flat
rock as big as your hand in the middle so that only an inch or
so of water covers it. Some birds do not like to wade into deep
water to bathe and can stand on the rock.
The sound of running or
dripping water will attract
birds from afar. Here’s an
easy project. Fill a clean,
plastic milk jug with water
and hang it several feet
above a birdbath bowl or
plastic dish on the ground.
Put a flat rock in the bowl,
and fill the bowl with water.
Unscrew the cap of the jug
slightly to allow air inside.
Make a tiny hole with a
needle or pin in the bottom
of the jug so the water drips
very slowly into the basin.
You can make
a temporary
birdbath by
digging a shallow
hole in the ground,
removing any
sharp stones or
sticks, and then
lining it with
heavy plastic.
Place gravel on
the bottom, put
rocks around the
edge to hide the
plastic, and fill it
with water.


Striped skunk


NATURE 37
.Mammals
Mammals
At first, identifying three different wild mammals in the field
might seem difficult. You might find rabbits, squirrels, chip-
munks, or woodchucks rather easily, but depending on where
you live or camp, other mammals might be more difficult to
see. But if you start by looking for tracks or other signs, you
will find that mammals are much more common than you
think. Look for the following signs.
• Tracks in the mud or sand along waterways
• Signs of feeding around fruit-bearing shrubs or trees
• Rough bark around the hole in a hollow tree
• Droppings on animal runways in woods and fields
• Animal homes—holes in the ground, muskrat houses, or
beaver dams
Kinds of Mammals
In general, the mammals you are likely to see can be grouped
as follows.
Pouched Mammals. The opossum is the only one in this
country; they are different from other mammals because the
females have a pouch in which to carry their young.
Moles and Shrews. Shrews are the smallest mammals—
some only 2 inches long. They have
pointed noses and short tails. They
live in leaf litter on the forest floor
or in tunnels under lawns and fields.
They eat insects and sometimes snails.
Moles have long, pointed noses, and
their front legs are shorter than their
back legs.
Shrew


38 NATURE
Mammals.
Bats. These are the only flying mammals in this country.
(Flying squirrels can actually only glide.) Bats have remarkable
flight abilities. They nest in caves or hollow trees and feed
on insects.
Omnivorous and Carnivorous. This group includes some of
the larger land mammals and most of the valuable furbearers.
Bears, raccoons, martens, fishers, weasels, mink, otters,
skunks, badgers, foxes, coyotes, wolves, bobcats, lynx, and
cougars are included. Some of them eat plants, but all are
capable of eating meat and have canine teeth for tearing flesh.
They live in many kinds of places; some are found in every
kind of a wildlife community.
Rodents. These animals are the gnaw-
ing mammals—mice, rats, woodchucks,
marmots, porcupines, beavers, musk-
rats, nutria, chipmunks, squirrels, and
gophers. This is the largest group in
terms of numbers and different species.
Rabbits. Found in most parts of the
country, hares and rabbits live in hedge-
rows, thickets, tangles, or holes in the
ground. They have long hind legs and
long ears. They eat only plants.
Hoofed Animals. Deer, moose, elk,
mountain goats, bighorn sheep, bison,
antelope, and wild pigs are in this group.
They have hoofed feet and teeth adapted
for cutting grasses and leaves. In general,
they are long-legged and among the larger
mammals. They usually are found in
wilder areas.
Water Mammals. Whales, seals,
walruses, porpoises, and dolphins live
in the oceans. They may resemble fish,
but the young are born live and feed on
milk. They breathe air and must surface
regularly for a fresh supply.
Armadillos. These animals have a shell-
like skin, a pointed nose, and rather
long ears. They eat insects, insect larvae,
worms, and some plants.
White-footed mouse
Elk
Walrus


NATURE 39
.Mammals
Plaster Casts
Animal tracks can be preserved for later study if you make a
plaster cast of them. To begin, form a strip of cardboard into
a circle, secure with tape, and place it around the track. Then
mix some plaster of paris in a can of water until the texture
resembles melted ice cream. Gently pour the plaster inside the
cardboard mold, allowing the mixture to flow into the track.
Do not pour the plaster directly into the track.
The plaster will take about 20 to 30 minutes to harden.
As it hardens, place a few short sticks across the plaster, inside
the cardboard, and pour a little more plaster on top. The sticks
will reinforce the plaster and keep it from breaking too easily.
When the plaster is hard, remove it from the mold and,
using an old toothbrush or stiff brush, carefully brush off the
dirt or sand that sticks to it. This cast is known as the negative,
and with it you can make as many positive casts of that track
as you want.
Next, decide what size of cast you want. Then make a
wood frame that size.
To make the positive cast—that is, the cast that resembles
the natural footprint—first coat the inside of the negative cast
with petroleum jelly. Then lay the wood frame on a flat board
and fill it with plaster of paris. Press the negative into the soft
plaster and leave it there until the plaster is thoroughly hard.
Then remove it from the mold, being careful not to crack the
plaster. Before you forget it, write the name of the animal and
the date on the flat top of the cast.
The Nature
merit badge
requirements
do not suggest
that you collect
or even touch
wild animals.
Remember that
some animals
might carry
diseases and
can be extremely
dangerous.
If the dirt or sand is too dry to make plaster casts of
animal tracks, use a long-handled spray gun to spray
shellac over the track from 4 to 5 feet away. Be care-
ful not to blow away the sand or dirt. The shellac will
hold the dirt in place so that you can make a plaster
print of it.
When working with plaster of paris, take care not to
inhale the dust as you work. Also, wash your hands
thoroughly with soap and water afterward.





NATURE 41
.Reptiles and Amphibians
Reptiles and
Amphibians
Before starting projects that will help you
learn more about reptiles and amphibians,
you should know what reptiles and
amphibians are and how they differ from
each other.
Reptiles include snakes, lizards,
turtles, alligators, and crocodiles. When
they are born, these animals look like their
parents. All of them are born on land and
all have lungs. They all have scales, plates,
or shells.
Salamanders, frogs, toads, and newts are amphibians. All
of these animals spend their early life in water or where it is
quite moist. As they grow older, many of them change into
entirely different looking animals. You may have seen tadpoles,
which dart around in the water and somewhat resemble large-
headed fish. Later, they grow legs and develop into frogs or
toads. They then live on land or in the water and on land.
They are called amphibians because they spend part of the
time in water and part on land.
Some reptiles and amphibians are poisonous or can bite
with painful results, so find out which ones to avoid
before venturing into their habitat. Most
amphibians are harmless, but some
species of salamanders
might give a nasty
bite, and some
toads might
have a highly
toxic secretion.
The word
“amphibian”
comes from a
Greek word that
means “leading
a double life.”
Arizona barred
tiger salamander
The giant toad secretes poisonous
toxins dangerous to pets.


42 NATURE
Reptiles and Amphibians.
Many reptiles are dangerous. There
are four groups of venomous snakes, one
poisonous lizard, and at least two turtles
that can inflict painful bites. There are
venomous snakes in nearly every state in
the country. They are more abundant in
some states and areas than in others.
The alligator snapping turtle
bites with its beak—
not its teeth.
Know what
venomous snakes
you might
encounter so you
can avoid them,
and know how to
render first aid
if necessary.
Rattlesnake
Copperhead
Eastern coral snake
Cottonmouth, or water moccasin


NATURE 43
.Reptiles and Amphibians
Timing Is Everything
The best time to look for reptiles and amphibians is in spring, as
they emerge from hibernation, seeking food and the warmth of
the sun, and hunt for their mates. All of these things, plus the
fact that vegetation has not started to grow, make them much
more conspicuous than they are at other times of the year.
Fall usually is the next best season to see reptiles. They
seek sunshine for warmth again, and many gather near dens
or burrows. Summer searching is unpredictable. You might find
turtles, water snakes, and many varieties of frogs during hot
weather, but most shun the heat and the sun. Others prowl
only at night; sometimes it is profitable to look for them with a
flashlight after dark. In areas with harsh
winters, these animals hibernate during the cold weather and
cannot be found.
Toad and Frog Calls
Each species has a distinctive call. Some, like the spring peeper,
have a high, piping note. Others, like leopard, wood, and pickerel
frogs, make a noise that sounds like a snore or a grunt; the call
of the green frog resembles a loose mandolin string; and the
bullfrog’s low “jug-o-rum” is well-known to almost everyone.
In the spring, frogs and toads sing day and night, but if
you try to approach them in the daytime they will stop long
before you reach them and you probably will never see them.
They will dive out of sight or hide under vegetation. However,
if you stalk them quietly at night, flashlight in hand, you may
be able to watch them sing. Unless you can go out with your
counselor or another expert, this
is the best way to learn calls.
Look for frogs and toads at night
so you know which call belongs
to which specimen.
Spring peeper


Orb weaving spider


NATURE 45
.Insects and Spiders
Insects and Spiders
Wherever you hike or camp, whether it is in the mountains,
on the edge of the deserts, on a coastal island, or in a prairie,
woods, marsh, or park, you are sure to find insects and spiders
of many kinds.
To identify insects and spiders you will need a good field
guide. In addition, your counselor or another expert can help
you. If there is a museum or a zoo nearby, you can probably
get help there. If not, rely on books available from your school
or public library, or, with your parent’s permission, search
the internet.
Collecting Insects
Insect collecting is an inexpensive hobby. Almost all the
equipment you need can be made from odds and ends found
around the house. If you plan to collect and mount your
specimens, you will need a collecting net, a killing jar,
a spreading board, and specimen boxes.
How to Make a Collecting Net
1. Bend a wire clothes hanger into a
squared hoop, as shown.
2. Make the bag from fine-mesh
fabric, or use a 5-gallon nylon
paint strainer (available at most
paint stores). Use fishing line to
sew the bag to the wire hoop.
3. Use duct tape to fasten the clothes hanger
to a wooden dowel or broom handle. Do
not make the handle too long or heavy to
handle easily.
Make sure you
can recognize
potentially
dangerous
spiders native to
your area before
setting out to
collect and/or
observe them.


46 NATURE
Insects and Spiders.
Freezing is the safest and cleanest alternative
to preparing insects for mounting. Put specimens
in a jar in the freezer (with your parent’s permis-
sion) until they are dead. Soft-bodied insects such
as maggots and caterpillars can be killed by placing
them directly in rubbing alcohol.
If you prefer, you can use a killing jar to pre-
pare insects for mounting. Wash and dry a wide-
mouthed jar, such as a pickle jar. Cut a piece of
cotton batting to fit the bottom of the jar, and cut
a disk of cardboard or wire screen the same size.
Moisten the cotton batting with nail polish remover
that contains ethyl acetate, and place it in the bot-
tom of the jar. Place the screen over the batting,
and add a crumpled tissue in the jar to absorb
moisture and to give the insect something to climb
on and hide in.
For showing your insects, all you need is a shallow
box lined at the bottom with polystyrene foam, corrugated
cardboard, or soft fiberboard. This material will hold the
pin on which specimens are mounted. If you use corrugated
cardboard, glue two layers together with the ridges running at
right angles. Your box will look better with white paper glued
on the sides and bottom of the inside.
Be sure to read the safety precautions on the product
you use in the killing jar. Label the jar as “poison,” and
keep it tightly closed, except when you are putting in or
taking out an insect. Do not breathe the fumes; always
go outside or to a well-ventilated area to put the fluid in
the killing jar, and keep it well away from fire.
If you see fine brown dust on the bottom of a specimen
box, you will know that dermestids—or carpet beetles,
whose larvae will eat mounted insects—are at work. To
keep them out, place moth crystals (paradichloroben-
zene) in one corner (preferably in an envelope, too), or
put the entire box in a freezer (with your parent’s per-
mission) for about a week.
Killing jar
Look for spiders in
cracks, corners,
and other hid-
den places, such
as the back of a
closet. Outside,
find them in webs
stretched between
branches of trees
and shrubs.


NATURE 47
.Insects and Spiders
The Spreading Board
You will need a spreading board to
mount butterflies, dragonflies, and
other winged insects. A standard
spreading board keeps the insect’s
body in the center groove so that its
wings dry in a slightly raised position.
So, when an insect is removed from
a spreading board, the wings will
droop a bit. Wings dried on a flat
surface would droop below the level
of the insect’s body, detracting from
the specimen’s appearance.
Insect Pins
You can purchase insect pins from a biological supply com-
pany. A local natural history museum, college, high school,
or agricultural agent can help you locate the nearest supply
company, or see the resources listed in this pamphlet.
While common straight pins can be used
for pinning insects, they are likely to rust
or spoil the specimens. Regular
insect pins are recommended.
Take care in pinning insects to do the least possible damage to the
specimens. The tiniest specimens (gnats, mosquitoes, small beetles)
are not pinned, but are glued to the tips of small paper points through
which the insect pins are thrust.
How to Pin Different Kinds of Insects
GIANT
WATER BUG BEETLE
BUTTERFLY
BEE
N.Y.: Nassau Co.
Baldwin
Aug. 10, 2007
Scout J. Jones
GRASSHOPPER


48 NATURE
Insects and Spiders.
Labels
Print the labels—called “points”—in permanent ink on small
pieces of stiff white paper and place them on the pin below
the specimen. One label should show the place and date of
capture and the collector’s name. Write the scientific and com-
mon names of the insect on the other label. Some enthusiasts
also give each specimen a number, which they enter in a
record book along with facts of interest, such as the plant on
which the insect was found, unusual weather conditions, and
color changes after death.
Raising Insects
Insects lay eggs that, when hatched, bring a new generation of
insects into the world. Some eggs hatch into smaller versions
of the adult insect. That is, the young closely resemble their
parents. They grow through several stages until they are the
same size as their parents. Grasshoppers, mantises, and crickets
are insects of this type.
Other insects, such as butterflies, moths, dragonflies, and
cicadas, lay eggs that hatch into larvae, or caterpillars, which
in turn spin a cocoon around themselves. They rest in this
pupa stage until they emerge as adult butterflies or moths.
The interesting thing is that in each stage of its life the insect
has a different appearance from each other stage. Sometimes
it is difficult to identify insects in the larval or pupal stages. If
this is the case, you can save the caterpillar or cocoon until it
develops into an adult.
With any insects,
you can collect egg
masses and keep them
outdoors or between the
screen and window to
watch them hatch. But
again, it is better not to
keep them inside where
they will develop too
quickly. The artificial
heat in your home will
cause them to hatch long
before there is natural
food for them.
Record books can
be an interesting
addition to a
collection, but
they should not
be used in place
of complete,
accurate labels.


NATURE 49
.Insects and Spiders
Becoming a Butterfly
To examine a complete metamorphosis, follow the stages of a
monarch butterfly’s life. This common orange and black but-
terfly, Danaus plexippus, begins life as a pale green egg on a
milkweed leaf. A tiny caterpillar emerges from the egg four
or five days after it is deposited. This is the larval stage of the
butterfly. The caterpillar immediately eats its eggshell, then
consumes milkweed leaves—the only food it will eat during
this stage.
For about 12 days, the caterpillar cuts off pieces of milk-
weed leaves with its strong jaws, molting three or four times
in the process. The full-size caterpillar, striped with bands of
yellow, black, and green, grows to about 2 inches long.
At the end of its larval stage, the caterpillar begins spin-
ning a silken thread from glands in its mouth, and it attaches
one end to a leaf, and the other end to the end of its body.
The caterpillar’s skin splits and slides off its body while the
caterpillar hangs down, revealing the third stage: the pupa or
chrysalis, a shiny, transparent green. It will hang from the leaf
for up to three weeks. Near the end of this stage, the chrysalis
turns very dark and the wing pattern of the butterfly will be
visible. Finally, the chrysalis will split, and the adult monarch
will crawl out. Its wings gradually expand and harden, and its
long hollow “tongue” will suck nectar from flowers.
Protect your live
insects from
too much direct
sunlight, which
can heat them
to extremes and
cause them to die.
EGGS ON A LEAF
CHRYSALIS
ADULT
CATERPILLAR
Life stages of a monarch butterfly


50 NATURE
Insects and Spiders.
Observing Ants and Bees
These most social insects are interesting to watch. To observe
ants at work, create an observation unit since their work natu-
rally takes place underground.
Preparing an Ant Observation Unit. Use two glass jars with
lids, one about 1 inch smaller and shorter than the other.
Follow these steps:
STEP 1—Cap the smaller jar and place it inside the larger one.
STEP 2—Drill two holes, each about ¼ inch in diameter, in the
lid of the larger jar.
STEP 3—Put a tight-fitting cork into one of the holes; this will
serve as an opening for feeding the colony.
To raise a butterfly at home, put a caterpillar in a covered shoebox
and supply it with plenty of leaves from the type of tree on which you
found it. You can also enclose the caterpillar and its tree branch in a
sleeve of mosquito netting to keep it safe from predators and parasites.
If you keep your chrysalis indoors, dampen it occasionally.


NATURE 51
.Insects and Spiders
STEP 4—Using rubber cement or a glue gun, fasten a screen of
fine cloth or wire mesh over the other hole. This construction
allows air to get in without letting the habitat dry out rapidly.
STEP 5—Find a living, functioning ant colony. Look under
large, flat rocks for a nest complete with workers, soldiers,
larvae, cocoons, eggs, and winged males and females. Scoop up
the living mass, along with some soil, and pour it into the space
between the two jars in your observation unit. Fill the space,
without packing the dirt, to within an inch of the top, and
secure the prepared lid of the larger jar.
You can now watch your colony thrive as its workers cre-
ate order from the chaos: they will tunnel in all directions;
gather eggs, larvae and cocoons; and organize all the elements
into neat piles to be tended by other workers.
To feed the colony, remove the cork and use a medicine
dropper to add honey water or sugar water for energy, and drop
in bits of hard-boiled egg or dry pet food for protein. Only a
small amount of food is required to feed the colony; too much
will decompose and contaminate the nest.
Keep the soil damp—but not wet—by adding a few drops
of water from time to time.
BLACK PAPER OR
RUBY-COLORED
CELLOPHANE
LARGER JAR
SMALLER JAR
LID
SCREENED AIRHOLE
CORKED FEEDING HOLE
SOIL AND ANTS
FOOD


52 NATURE
Insects and Spiders.
All About Bees
Watching bees at work may help you gain a new appre-
ciation for the produce we take for granted. Without bees, the
critical work of pollination would not be accomplished, and
the future of many food sources would be threatened. Bees
also pollinate many of the crops and livestock feed our
farmers grow.
Though many creatures transfer pollen as they travel
about, the honey bee’s pollination work is unique in three
ways: First, the honey bee practices flower fidelity. That means
honey bees visit only one kind of flower on each nectar-forag-
ing trip, so the pollen is transferred to a flower that can use it.
Second, the honey bee population is staggering. A full-size colo-
ny produces thousands of pollinators each season for quantities
unmatched by any other pollinating species. Third, honey bees
can be raised in human-constructed hives that can be moved
where honey bees are needed.
This enormous population of dedicated pollinators car-
ries out the important work of fertilizing flowering plants. This
fertilization enables the pollinated plant to produce seeds from
which a new plant may grow. Eventually, these seeds may be
contained within the delicious fruit and nutritious vegetables
we eat—all thanks to the industrious activity of the honey bee.
If you want to choose optional
requirement 4d(2) and keep a colony
of bees through one season, you
should first find out whether you are
allergic to bee stings. This can be
determined by a visit to an allergist
or your family physician. If it turns out you are allergic
to bee stings, you should choose another option. If you
visit a beekeeper, before you do so, be sure your buddy
also has been checked by a physician and is not allergic
to bee stings.
For help with locating a beekeeper in your state, visit
www.beeculture.com and click on “find a beekeeper
near you.”
For more informa-
tion about honey
bees and bee-
keeping, see the
Gardening merit
badge pamphlet.


NATURE 53
.Insects and Spiders
Becoming a beekeeper can command a substantial invest-
ment of materials, time, and effort. Discuss your options with
your parent, and investigate methods for getting involved in
beekeeping that will correspond to your interest level.
Before You Work
With Bees
• It’s important to make sure
you are not allergic to bee
stings by visiting an allergist
or your family physician.
If you are, do not put your-
self at risk; choose a different
option. The buddy you choose
should also be checked out
beforehand and cleared.
• Find an established bee-
keeper in your area with help
from your counselor. Take your
buddy with you, and discuss
opportunities for working with
the beekeeper throughout the
season. You may also find a
local beekeeper and learn more
about beekeeping by visiting
www.beeculture.com.
• Wear a bee suit for protection
from stings. Some beekeepers
keep spare suits on hand, or you
can purchase an inexpensive
Tyvek coveralls suit from a hard-
ware store. Make sure to wear
gloves, boots, and a veil. When
you feel safe in your gear, you
won’t worry about being stung.
• Join a beekeeping club to
learn more about this vocation—
or avocation.
Beekeepers use human-constructed hives with
movable frames as required by law. This type
of hive serves as a safe home for bees and as
a practical, manageable collection station for
the beekeeper.
OUTER COVER
INNER COVER
SECTION SUPER
QUEEN EXCLUDER
SHALLOW SUPER
HIVE BODY
BOTTOM BOARD
HIVE STAND





NATURE 55
.Fish
Fish
Fish can be found just about anywhere there is water. Whether
as small as a backyard pond or as large as an ocean, bodies of
water are home to fish of all shapes and sizes. Freshwater fish
you might catch include the following.
Black Bass. Look for largemouth, smallmouth,
and spotted bass around brush, fallen
trees, weed beds, and rock ledges. Use
bait such as leeches, minnows, frogs,
jigs, and plastic worms and bugs.
Panfish. Rock bass, bluegill (and other sun-
fishes), and crappie are all in this category. Rock
bass are brassy-colored with rows of black scales.
They will strike at almost any kind of live bait or
lure and can be found around bridge piers, docks,
boulders, and weed beds. Bluegill are purplish
with a distinctive dark blue patch on the
gill cover. Use small hooks to catch
them. Crappie are larger than bluegill,
are silvery with black markings, and
will strike at small spinners and lures.
Catfish. These are smooth-skinned, scale-
less fish found in most of the United States,
from clear, icy waters in the North to warm, muddy
waters in the South. They are relatively easy to catch with all
kinds of bait. Look for them beneath undercut banks and log-
jams, and in deep holes and channels.
Smallmouth bass
Bluegill


56 NATURE
Fish.
Stream Trout. These are sleek and colorful fish. Brook trout are
dark with light spots and light edges to their lower fins, rainbow
trout have silvery sides with small dark spots, and brown trout
are yellowish-tan with brown and red spots that appear sur-
rounded by a halo. Trout will bite all types of flies, small spoons,
and spinners, as well as worms, minnows, and insects.
If you live near coastal areas, you can fish from piers or
the surf, or troll or cast from outboard craft. Some saltwater
fish you might catch include California yellowtail, drum,
pompano, redfish, salmon, snapper, and spotted sea trout.
Finding a place to catch fish in freshwater or salt
water should be easy. However, catching fish might
take a little skill. Here are a few tips to help you land
a few.
• Look for them where the bank meets the water,
where a sandbar drops off, and where two cur-
rents meet.
• Look for them around weed beds; underneath
overhanging trees, brush, and docks; and where
rocks jut out from shore.
• Rushing water carries food and lots of oxygen,
both of which fish enjoy. Look for them in pools
under waterfalls.
Prepare before you go. Assemble the right equip-
ment—tackle, bait, and clothing—for the kind of
fishing you plan to do. Obey all fish and game
laws, be aware of limits and seasons, and obtain all
required licenses. For safety, let someone know your
travel plan. Take a friend, and have fun!
Catch and release
is an important
conservation
measure practiced
by anglers. In
some areas,
catch and release
is the law. See
the Fishing and
Fly-Fishing merit
badge pamphlets
for more
information on
the sport.





58 NATURE
Mollusks and Crustaceans.
Mollusks and
Crustaceans
Collecting and identifying mollusks (snails, slugs, clams,
mussels, oysters, whelks) and crustaceans (crabs, lobsters,
crayfish, shrimp) will be easier if you live along coastal areas.
However, many of them do live in freshwater and on land.
Crustaceans can be caught with nets in shallow water or
with traps in deeper water. Dip nets and traps can be found
at hardware stores and fishing tackle shops. Local anglers
and sports enthusiasts may know where best to collect crabs
and other crustaceans.
Crabbing with a piece of firm meat tied to a string is both
fun and challenging. Crabs grasp the meat and hold on to the
bait while the string is slowly pulled toward the surface of the
water. With a dip net already in the water, you quickly pull the
net up under the crab before the crab drops the bait.
Dip nets and quick
hands are the
best way to
collect crayfish
and shrimp
in freshwater.


NATURE 59
.Mollusks and Crustaceans
Like clams, mollusks usually are in the sand or mud and
can be dug at low tide with a rake or shovel. Oysters and mus-
sels can be collected from the rocks and hard surfaces along
the shore between high and low watermarks. Shells of many
mollusks that die wash up on shore and are easy to collect after
storms. Land snails, often called slugs, can be found in gardens
and under decaying leaf litter. In freshwater, water snails can be
found attached to rocks on the stream bottom, while mussels
are usually partially submerged in bottom sediments.
Mounting Shells
Mount shells in flat trays or boxes with a glass top that keeps
the dust away. Boxes with compartments or plastic jewelry
boxes help to keep the shells from knocking together and
breaking. Because thin shells are easily
broken, it might also be a good idea to
cushion them with tissue paper.
Shells may be labeled in much the
same way as insects. The label should
identify the species and can also list such
information as the date and place it was
found, as well as any color features.
SHELL COLLECTING TRAY
GLASS COTTON
LABELED SPECIMENS
To date, no marine mollusks are endangered, but this is not the case
for some freshwater mussels, snails, and crayfish. Make sure you are
aware if there are any restrictions on collecting these animals.





NATURE 61
.Plants
Plants
Identifying 15 species of wild plants should be an easy task,
wherever you live. There are few wildlife communities that do
not contain at least 15 different plants. If you can’t find them
within your wildlife community, try looking along the edges.
Try identifying the plants you see on your way to school, in
the city park, in Scout camp, or even on a farm or in your
backyard. First, though, you should know something of the
five major groupings of the plant kingdom.
Mosslike Plants (Bryophytes): This group includes mosses,
liverworts, and hornworts. These small plants usually grow in
damp and shady areas. They have no true roots and do not
produce flowers and seeds, but in-stead reproduce through
spores.
Fernlike Plants (Pteridophytes): In this group are the ferns
and horsetails. These plants have true roots, stems, and leaves,
and reproduce through spores rather than flowers and seeds.
Gymnosperms: These seed-producing vascular plants do not
form flowers or fruit but bear seeds in a protective barrier or
seed coat such as a cone. Examples are conifers and the like.
Angiosperms: These plants produce flowers and usually
bear their seeds in fruits, although sometimes they throw out
runners. They are the biggest and most diverse group in the
plant kingdom. This group includes mono-cots (one embryonic
leaf) such as grasses, wheat, orchids, bananas, and lilies and
dicots (two embryonic leaves) such as beans, sunflowers,
apples, maple trees, and oak trees.
Most algae are placed in separate kingdoms. Green algae
are more closely related to land plants and are sometimes
included in the plant kingdom. However, this classification is
subject to debate in the scientific community and has yet to be
definitively determined.


62 NATURE
Plants.
.
Poisonous Plants. Some plants, including poison ivy, poi-
son oak, and poison sumac, contain oily sap that can cause a
rash or illness if it comes into contact with skin. Reactions can
include blisters, swelling, itching, burning, headache, and even
fever—symptoms that can occur after the sap is on skin for 10
to 20 minutes.
If you think you have touched a poisonous plant, wash
the exposed area well with soap and water, wipe with rubbing
alcohol, and apply calamine lotion. A severe reaction, contact
with genital areas, or ingestion requires immediate medical
attention. Sap can also adhere to clothing, so change out of the
affected garments immediately, and keep them separate from
other clothing. Wash the garments separately as well when you
get home.
Poison oak
Poison ivy
Poison sumac
Poison Control
Center
800-222-1222


NATURE 63
.Plants
Collecting Leaves
Collecting leaves is simple, if you remember three things: avoid
poisonous plants; collect specimens as perfect (without insect
holes) as you can; and be sure to collect the entire leaf. Some
plants, like the hickories, sumacs, locusts, and ashes, have com-
pound leaves. That is, each leaf has several leaflets. If you do
not collect the entire leaf, the specimen might be misleading and
your collection will not be satisfactory.
The next step is to press the leaves and dry them. Using
old newspapers, make a press such as the one shown. Place the
leaves in it carefully, so they dry flat and are not creased. When
the leaves are thoroughly dry, mount them in a notebook using
double-sided tape to hold them to the page. Label each with the
name of the specimen, the date, and the place it was collected.
Collecting Seeds
Seeds will be easiest to find from midsummer to late fall—from
the time annual weeds start to produce seed to the time trees
produce acorns, nuts, and other seeds. But if you look under
pines or spruces in the winter you might find seeds
that birds or mammals have spread
as they break cones apart.
You will certainly find cones,
and it is easy to dry them
out and get the seeds yourself.
Seeds you collect can be stored in small plastic sandwich bags,
plastic boxes, or bottles. Store larger seeds in boxes or jars.
Write the name, date, and place of collection on a small piece of
paper and paste it to the envelope, bottle, or jar.
A homemade
press is suitable
to dry and flatten
leaves before
mounting. After
mounting, keep
the leaves under
pressure so they
will not curl
or break.





NATURE 65
.Soil and Rocks
Soil and Rocks
There are many kinds of rock
and rock formations in this
country. Let’s look at rocks
according to the way they
formed. There are three general
groups of rocks: igneous, sedi-
mentary, and metamorphic.
Rock Types
Igneous Rocks
Most of us have not actually
seen a volcano erupting. But
we know that when one does
erupt, lava pours forth. Lava is
molten rock—that is, rock that
has been heated miles under-
ground until it is liquid. As this
lava pours out, the air cools
it, and it hardens into igneous
rock. One of the more common
igneous rocks is granite, which
forms beneath the Earth and
is forced to the surface by the
compression of land masses.
Igneous rocks can contain many varieties of minerals,
including quartz, feldspar, and a group of minerals containing
iron and magnesium. Igneous rocks containing quartz and
feldspar are usually light in weight and color, while those
containing iron are heavier and darker.
NATURE 65


66 NATURE
Soil and Rocks.
Sedimentary Rocks
When bits of rock and soil are washed into an
ocean or lake, they settle to the bottom, layer
upon layer. Finally, by pressure from the water
above, these layers of sediment become pressed
together into solid rock. Sandstone is a type
of sedimentary rock formed by this type of
pressure on sand. Shale is a sedimentary rock
formed when layers of clay are pressed into
solid rock.
Some sedimentary rocks contain shells from shellfish,
skeletons of other water animals, and the remains of water
plants. Limestone and chalk are sedimentary rocks formed
from animal (shellfish) remains, while coal is sedimentary
rock formed by pressure on plant remains.
Sedimentary rock also forms when rock is dissolved in
liquid, such as flowing water, and hardened again. Certain
iron ores, flint, gypsum, and common salt are examples of
sedimentary rock formed in this way.
Metamorphic Rocks
Pressure and heat are two of these forces that help to form
metamorphic rock. After igneous rock is broken down and
sedimentary rock is formed, heat and pressure can change
them into metamorphic rock.
Heat and pressure might change the texture of the original
rock, or new minerals might be added or formed from chemi-
cals extracted from existing
rocks. In some cases, more
than one of these processes
occurs in the formation of
the new rock.
Granite is an igneous
rock, but under heat and
pressure it can change to
a metamorphic rock called
gneiss. Shale, a sedimentary
rock, can change into slate.
Sandstone, also a sedimen-
tary rock, can change into
quartzite. Limestone can
change into marble.Marble


NATURE 67
.Soil and Rocks
Different degrees
of heat and pres-
sure bring about
different changes.
Shale, which
will change to
slate under heat
and pressure,
might become
an even harder
rock called schist
when exposed to
extreme heat
and pressure.
Soil Profiles
One way to classify soils is by the mix of sand, clay,
and silt. Soils with a high percentage of clay (by
weight) are categorized as clays; sandy soils contain
a high weight percentage of sand. The best soils,
called loams, contain less than 30% silt and up to
50% by weight of either sand or silt. When this base
soil contains an additional mixture of humus (organic
material), the soil is highly productive and can support
heavy plant growth and associated animal life.
What Is Soil?
Soil is a self-renewing compound of rock and mineral particles,
organic material, living organisms, air, and moisture. It is not living,
but it supports life. If you look closely at some soil, you’ll see many
bits of rock, mineral crystals, plant roots, decayed leaves and other
materials, worms, tiny living and dead plants and animals, water,
and air. Though the proportions vary, all soil consists of mineral and
organic matter, water, and air.
Source: U.S. Department of Agriculture Texture Triangle


68 NATURE
Organisms Once Classified as Plants
Slime Molds: As their name describes, slime molds appear like
colorful alien slime on wood, rocks, or leaf litter. This group of
organisms has characteristics of both plants and animals. They
begin as a microscopic, single cell, amoeba like animal. They feed
on the bacteria that break down woody debris. As they do this
the nutrients are returned to soil. These molds are also eaten by
beetles and other insects.
Their unique ability occurs when they reproduce. Many
of the individual cells combine into one large, single-celled
organism. This is the stage that is easily seen and the most
familiar to us. The single cell acts more like a plant and produces
spores that are spread by the wind. The spores once again
develop into the single-cell amoeba-like phase.
Fungi: This group of organisms includes some of the most
widely distributed across the world. They play important roles
in nature. We are most familiar with the groups that produce
reproductive structure called mushrooms or toadstools. Most of
the time fungi live as thin filaments of hyphae. These hyphae
might also group into rootlike structures that are easily seen
when digging in topsoil.
Some fungi secrete enzymes that help break down organic
material. In doing this they return important nutrients into
the soil. Other fungi live in partnership with plant roots. They
absorb and supply nutrients from the soil and receive carbon
from the plants they need to grow.
The largest know organism in the world is a fungus with
hyphae that spread out over 2,385 acres in Oregon.
Soil and Rocks
Some varieties
of mushrooms
and berries
are extremely
poisonous. Do not
touch them unless
you know the
species is safe.


NATURE 69
.Nature Resources
Scouting Literature
Conservation Handbook; Fieldbook;
Mammals pocket guide; Reptiles
and Amphibians pocket guide;
Eastern Backyard Birds pocket guide;
Western Backyard Birds pocket guide;
Bugs and Slugs pocket guide; Edible
Wild Plants pocket guide; Roadside
Wildflowers pocket guide; Freshwater
Fishes pocket guide; Trees pocket guide;
Geology pocket guide; Animal Science,
Backpacking, Bird Study, Camping,
Canoeing, Environmental Science, Fish
and Wildlife Management, Fishing,
Fly-Fishing, Forestry, Gardening, Geology,
Hiking, Insect Study, Mammal Study,
Oceanography, Photography, Plant Science,
Reptile and Amphibian Study, Soil and
Water Conservation, Sustainability,
and Wilderness Survival merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Alderfer, Jonathon and J. L. Dunn.
National Geographic Field Guide to
the Birds of North America, 7th ed.
National Geographic, 2017
Arnett, Ross H. American Insects:
A Handbook of the Insects of
America North of Mexico, 2nd ed.
CRC Press, 2000.
Behler, John. Reptiles (The National
Audubon Society First Field Guide).
Scholastic Trade, 1999.
Bland, Roger G., and H.E. Jaques.
How to Know the Insects, 3rd ed.
Waveland Press, 2010.
Cassie, Brian. Amphibians (The
National Audubon Society First
Field Guide). Scholastic Trade, 1999.
Dance, S. Peter. Shells, 2nd ed. DK
Adult, 2002.
Dillon, Mike. The Great Birdhouse Book.
Sterling Publications, 2000.
Elpel, Thomas J. Botany in a Day:
The Patterns Method of
Plant Identification, 6th ed.
Hops Press, 2013.
Fichter, George S., and Phil Francis.
Fishing: A Guide to Fresh and
Salt-Water Fishing, St. Martin's
Press, 2013.
Nature Resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


70 NATURE
Nature Resources.
Griggs, Jack, ed. All the Birds of
North America: American Bird
Conservancy’s Field Guide.
Harper Collins, 2002.
Harris, James G., and Melinda
Woolf Harris. Plant Identification
Terminology: An Illustrated
Glossary, 2nd. ed. Spring Lake
Publishers, 2001.
Izaak Walton League of America. Guide
to Aquatic Insects and Crustaceans.
Stackpole Books, 2006.
Levine, Lynn, and Martha Mitchell.
Mammal Tracks and Scat: Life-Size
Tracking Guide. Heartwood
Press, 2008.
MacDonald, David, ed. The
Encyclopedia of Mammals. Facts on
File, 2006.
Peterson Roger Tory. Peterson Field
Guide To Birds Of North America,
2nd ed. Mariner Books. 2000.
Rehder, Harald A. National Audubon
Society Field Guide to North
American Seashells. Knopf, 1981.
Stokes, Donald, A Guide to Observing
Insect Lives. Little, Brown and
Company. 1983
Tarbuck, Edward J., et al. Earth: An
Introduction to Physical Geology,
11th ed. Pearson, 2013.
Wernert, Susan J., ed. Reader’s Digest
North American Wildlife. Reader’s
Digest, 2008.
Organizations, Periodicals,
and Websites
Acorn Naturalists
www.acornnaturalists.com
American Birding Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-850-2473
www.aba.org
American Museum of Natural History
Central Park West at 79th Street
New York, NY 10024-5192
www.amnh.org
Bee Culture Magazine
www.beeculture.com
Discover Magazine
www.discovermagazine.com
Leave No Trace
P.O. Box 997
Boulder, CO 80306
www.lnt.org
National Audubon Society
www.audubon.org
National Fish and Wildlife Foundation
1133 15th St. NW, Suite 1000
Washington, DC 20005
www.nfwf.org
National Geographic Society
www.nationalgeographic.com
National Park Service
www.nps.gov
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
www.fws.gov
World Wildlife Fund
www.worldwildlife.org


NATURE 71
.Nature Resources
Phone and Web Apps
Birding apps
Merlin Bird ID
by Cornell Lab of Ornithology
National Geographic Birds
Audubon Bird Guide
Plant apps
Picture This Plant Identifier
from Glority Global Group Ltd.
PlantNet Plant Identification
LeafSnap
iNaturalist
Rock apps
Rock Identifier: Stone ID
by Next Vision Limited
Common Rocks Reference
Insect and Butterfly apps
Insect ID
Butterflies and Moths of North America
Species Search
Picture Insect: Spiders and Bugs from
Next Vision Limited
Recordings of Bird Calls
Peterson, Roger Tory. Field Guide to
Bird Songs: Eastern/Central North
America. 1990. CD with 250 species.
Walton, Richard, and Robert Lawson.
Birding by Ear. 1989.
———. Birding by Ear: Western. 1990.
———. More Birding by Ear: Eastern
and Central. 1994.
Biological Supply Companies
BioQuip Products
Telephone: 310-667-8800
www.bioquip.com
Carolina Biological Supply Company
www.carolina.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee for the
improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Scouting America thanks Gary
Stolz, Ph.D., U.S. Fish and Wildlife
Service, for his involvement with revi-
sions to the Nature merit badge pam-
phlet. We are grateful for his thorough
review and input.
For reviewing and suggesting
updates to this edition of the pam-
phlet, Scouting America thanks Suse
Bell, Scouting America Outdoor Ethics
& Conservation Committee; Lindsey
Geers, Nature Director Scouting America
Camp; Michael Huneke, Outdoor Ethics
& Conservation Committee; Stephen
Scannell, Scouting America Outdoor
Ethics & Conservation Committee; and
Perry Leong, National Merit Badge
Subcommittee.


72 NATURE
Nature Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Allen Bridgman, SCDNR, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 42 (copperhead, both)
David Cappaert, Michigan State
University, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 43
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Organization/David McClenaghan,
courtesy—page 41 (giant toad)
Gardensafari.net/H. Arentsen,
courtesy—page 37
James Henderson, Gulf South
Research Corporation,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 42 (rattlesnake on right)
International Game Fish Association;
artist Duane Raver—page 55 (both)
Jeffrey J. Jackson, University of
Georgia, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 42 (coral snake)
iStock / Getty Images Plus—page 65
Kitty Kohout, The Morton Arboretum,
Lisle, Illinois—page 62
(poison sumac)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration, courtesy—
page 38 (white-footed mouse)
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration/Capt. Budd
Christman, NOAA Corps, courtesy—
page 38 (walrus)
U.S. Department of Agriculture/Bob
Nichols, courtesy—page 13
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, courtesy—
pages 29 (woodpecker) and 30
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Steve
Maslowski, courtesy—page
19 (prairie warbler)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Pete
Pattavina, courtesy—page 42
(cottonmouth on right)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Gary
M. Stolz, courtesy—page 42 (turtle,
rattlesnake on left)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 22,
27–28 (all), 29 (American robin),
and 33 (barn swallow nest)
Wikipedia.org and the Public Health
Image Library, a Division of the Centers
for Disease Control, courtesy—page 42
(cottonmouth on left)
Wikipedia.org/Whit Welles, courtesy—
page 12
All other photos and illustrations are
the property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—page 10 (canoe)
Gene Daniels—page 20
John McDearmon—pages 7, 15, 24, 31
(plans), 33 (mourning dove nest bas-
ket and plans), 34 (all), 45 (both),
47 (all illustrations), 49 (all illustra-
tions), 51, 53 (hive), 59 (all illustra-
tions), and 63 (all illustrations)
Brian Payne—pages 8, 10 (hikers), and
38 (elk)
Randy Piland—page 62 (poison oak)
Steve Seeger—page 60
Julie Zickefoose—pages 31
(nest box) and 35