OCEANOGR APHY
STEM-BasedSTEM-Based


OCEANOGR APHY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35924
ISBN 978-0-8395-3306-1
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Oceanography or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


OCEANOGRAPHY 3


4 OCEANOGRAPHY


OCEANOGRAPHY 5
Contents
Our Blue Planet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Our Solid Earth . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Earth and the Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Our Liquid Planet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
The Oceans and the Atmosphere . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 30
Our Living Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Technology and the Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Careers Related to the Sea . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Oceanography Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74
Oceanography Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78





OCEANOGRAPHY 7
.Our Blue Planet
Our Blue Planet
In some way, the oceans touch every part of Earth. The oceans
cover more than 70 percent of our planet and are the dominant
feature of Earth. Wherever you live, the oceans influence the
weather, the soil, the air, and the geography of your community.
Apollo astronauts hurtling toward the moon looked back at a
blue sphere speckled with clouds. To study the oceans is to
study Earth itself.
Since the world’s oceans are all connected, you could think
of them as one great ocean. But people have given the various
oceans names and have even debated their number. They are,
from largest to smallest, the Pacific, the Atlantic, the Indian,
the Southern, and the Arctic Oceans.
What Is Oceanography?
Oceanography covers all aspects of ocean study and exploration.
• Geological oceanography focuses on the topographic features and
physical makeup of the ocean floor.
• Physical oceanography deals with the motions of seawater, such as
waves, tides, and currents.
• Chemical oceanography concerns the distribution of chemical
compounds and chemical reactions in the ocean and on the seafloor.
• Meteorological oceanography pertains to the study of the ocean’s
interaction with the atmosphere and its effect on weather and climate.
• Biological oceanography concentrates on plant and animal life in the sea.
Studying the oceans tells us much about the land, rivers, lakes, and the
air—our entire planet. This may help us to find new sources or supplies
of food, freshwater, minerals, and energy, and a new understanding of
weather and climatic patterns.


8 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Blue Planet.
Connected to each ocean are seas, bays, and gulfs that
you would consider part of that ocean. For example, the Red
Sea, northeast of Africa, is part of the Indian Ocean, just as
the Caribbean and Mediterranean Seas are part of the Atlantic.
The Southern Ocean is the locale of some of the roughest seas
on Earth.
The real beginning of deep-sea research came with the
HMS Challenger expedition. In 1872, the Challenger left England
with a crew of five scientists, 23 officers, and 243 sailors to
explore the deep seas. For three and a half years, the vessel
crossed the Atlantic, Pacific, and Antarctic (Southern) Oceans.
The crew’s scientific research included measuring water
temperatures at great depths and collecting sediments, water
samples, and thousands of forms of marine life never before seen.
The expedition brought new knowledge of ocean temperatures,
ocean currents, and the depths and contours of the ocean basins.
Scientists took 23 years to compile the results of the voyage in
a 50-volume, 29,500-page report that is still used today.
The International Hydrographic
Organization lists the five oceans
mentioned here, but some
people (and maps) still use
different names. Some
people call the waters at
the northernmost reaches
of Earth the Arctic Sea and
consider it part of the Atlantic
Ocean. Some consider the
Southern Ocean—which
surrounds Antarctica—to be
the southern reaches of the
Atlantic, Pacific, and Indian
Oceans, while others prefer to
call it the Antarctic Ocean.


OCEANOGRAPHY 9
.Our Blue Planet
Significance of the Challenger Expedition
The historical 1872 Challenger expedition led to:
• The first systematic plot of ocean temperatures and currents
• Development of the first maps of the deep-sea bottom deposits and
water depths
• Discovery of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge
• Recording of water depth of 27,060 feet (8,248 meters) at the
Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench, the deepest known point
in the world’s oceans*
• Discovery of 715 new genera and 4,717 new species of ocean life forms,
including phenomenal organisms living at great depths (proving that life
exists even in extreme environments)
*Revised estimates of water depth there have ranged from about 35,800 to
36,200 feet (10,912 to 11,034 meters).
Throughout human history people have sought to understand the sea.
The ancient Greeks spoke with awe of the god Poseidon, who they
believed ruled the waves and the depths beneath. Polynesian sailors
crossed thousands of miles on open-air crafts to settle a myriad of islands
of the Pacific. European explorers plied the mysterious Atlantic westward
in search of the herbs and spices of the Orient and eventually discovered
what is now known as North and South America.


Underwater physical features of the ocean
ACTIVE
VOLCANO
SEMILIQUID
MANTLE
RISING
MAGMA
OCEANIC
TRENCH
VOLCANIC ISLANDS
OCEANIC
CRUST
MANTLE
SEA
LEVEL


OCEANOGRAPHY 11
.Our Solid Earth
Our Solid Earth
Many scientists believe that billions of years ago Earth had
just one or two supercontinents, which slowly broke apart and
moved away from one another to form the continents we know
today. These same scientists believe that the outermost shell of
Earth (the lithosphere) is formed of rigid plates that, over time,
slowly move across Earth’s surface.
Plate Tectonics
Much geological proof supports the idea of continental drift—
that today’s continents slowly move atop massive plates.
The plates, perhaps 50 miles thick and up to thousands of
miles across, float on a bed of partly molten rock. These plates
extend under the ocean as well as under the continents.
Oceanic Fracture Zones
Around the world, earthquakes most commonly happen along
plate boundaries. Deep earthquakes occur where plates slide
under each other. Shallow earthquakes occur along ocean
ridges, or where plates slide by each other without colliding.
Oceanic fracture zones are long, straight ridges and troughs that
cut across the ocean ridges. Frequent underwater earthquakes
cause new oceanic crust to form at these zones.
“Plate tectonics” is a geological theory that holds
that these plates slowly collide to form the world’s
mountain chains. Scientists have identified at least
six major plates as well as some smaller ones. Plates
pushing together or sliding under each other form
mid-ocean ridges, or underwater mountain ranges,
and oceanic trenches.


Seafloor spreading
SEA LEVEL
RIFT VALLEY
MERIDIAN
RIDGEOCEAN
TRENCH
SPREADING
EARTHQUAKES
CONTINENT
CONTINENT
SPREADING
RISING HOT
MAGMA
12 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Solid Earth.
Rifts and Seafloor Spreading
Some narrow seas on Earth may be widening into new oceans.
For example, the Red Sea between mainland Egypt and the Sinai
Peninsula fills a widening rift in the continental crust. Many
scientists believe that rift valleys indicate where continents are
drifting apart prior to separating. This process of a crack widen-
ing under the sea is called seafloor spreading.
Magma (molten rock) from deep within Earth may emerge
from an ocean rift and form a new seafloor basin. If this occurs
and seafloor spreading continues, a new ocean may form.
Evidence of rifts and sediments as well as volcanic formations
that rim the coasts from New England to Iceland and Africa
point to the formation of the Atlantic Ocean.
The world’s oceans are in different stages of widening
and narrowing:
• The Atlantic Ocean is spreading on both sides.
• The Indian Ocean is widening on the west side but
narrowing on the east.
• The Pacific Ocean is narrowing on both sides and
probably will disappear in the future as Asia collides
with the Americas.


CONTINENTAL MARGIN
COASTAL
REGION CONTINENTAL
SHELF
CONTINENTAL
EDGE
CONTINENTAL
SLOPE CONTINENTAL
RISE ABYSSAL PLAINS
OCEAN BASIN
OCEANIC RIDGE
DEPTH IN KM
0
1
2
3
4
OCEANOGRAPHY 13
.Our Solid Earth
Continental Slope
Where the edges of the continents touch the sea, the geologic
features are different. This area includes the continental shelf
and the continental slope. The shallow sea bottom just offshore
forms the continental shelf. This gradually sloping and shallow
area contains water that is at most only a couple of hundred
feet deep.
In some places, the continental shelf is only a few miles
wide; in others, it can be a hundred miles or more. Beyond
the continental shelf, the ocean depth drops off quickly. This
slope, leading into deepwater, is called the continental slope.
Occasionally, deep V-shaped valleys cut into the hard rock of
the continental slope. These are called submarine canyons,
which may be cracks from earthquakes or gullies cut by
ocean currents.
Great currents heavy with sand and soil flow down the
continental slope and deposit the material on the large flat areas
of the ocean floor called the abyssal plains. These turbidity
currents drop sediments rich in minerals and decomposing
organic matter across most of the seabed, except on the mid-
ocean ridges. The abyssal plains are larger in the Atlantic Ocean
than in the Pacific because many of the world’s major sediment
carrying rivers such as the Mississippi and Amazon empty into
the Atlantic. Also, large oceanic trenches scattered in the Pacific
Ocean trap sediments. These trenches, found along the edge
of ocean basins, are long, narrow, steep-sided depressions in
the seabed. They contain the deepest parts of the ocean.
The main features
of the open ocean
regions


14 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Solid Earth.
Some solitary undersea mountains called seamounts rise several
thousand feet from the ocean floor. Their cone-shaped peaks remain
submerged unless the water level drops. During the last Ice Age, much
of the ocean’s water froze to form vast glaciers, and the ocean’s level
fell much lower than what it is today. Wave action eroded and flattened
the tops of exposed seamount peaks and resulted in what are called
guyots. When the glaciers melted, the ocean levels rose and covered
up those guyots.
Topographic features of the ocean floor
ESTUARY
CONTINENTAL SHELF
CONTINENTAL
SLOPE
CONTINENTAL
BORDERLAND
OCEANIC
FRACTURE ZONE
ABYSSAL PLAIN
PLATEAU
SUBMARINE CANYON
COASTAL PLAIN
GUYOTS
ISLAND ARC
OCEANIC
TRENCH
ATOLL
RIFT VALLEY
VOLCANIC
ISLAND
BASIN
RISE
BENCH
METAMORPHIC ROCK SEDIMENTARY ROCK BASALTIC ROCK
CONTINENTAL RISE
DEEP-SEA
CHANNEL
RIDGE
SEAMOUNTS
ABYSSAL
HILLS


OCEANOGRAPHY 15
.Our Solid Earth
The Formation of Islands
The sea contains thousands of oceanic and continental islands.
Geological disturbances beneath the water such as earthquakes
and volcanoes create oceanic islands. Sometimes seamounts that
were created by giant underwater volcanoes reach the surface to
form volcanic islands. The island of Hawaii is actually the top of a
seamount. Where two plates of Earth’s crust come together, vol-
canic islands develop in long, narrow, curved chains such as the
Aleutian Islands by the Alaska Peninsula. The magma rising
through the volcanoes helps to enlarge the islands in the arc.
Continental islands once joined the nearby continent.
The connecting land gradually disappeared because of erosion
or flooding. Along low sandy coasts, such as the eastern coast
of the United States, long strips of sand called barrier beaches
are separated from the shore by lagoons. Barrier islands are
broader barrier beaches. These are separated from the mainland
by narrow water passages called sounds.
Mountain Heights, Ocean Depths
Highest mountain on land: Mount Everest—29,035 feet (8,850 meters)
Highest mountain on Earth: Mauna Kea—33,476 feet (10,203 meters)
from its base on the ocean floor. This mountain rises 13,796 feet
(4,205 meters) above sea level, but almost 60 percent of its full height
is below the surface.
Greatest known ocean depth: Challenger Deep—approximately
36,000 feet (10,973 meters)
During severe storms, barrier islands help protect the coastline.


16 OCEANOGRAPHY
Earth and the Sea.
Earth and the Sea
When you think of the ocean, you probably think of motion
because the ocean is always moving. As a free liquid on a
spinning planet, it is constantly tugged and pushed by forces
near and far. Much of the ocean’s motion takes the form of
waves and tides.
Waves
The sea surface heaves and sighs as waves rise and fall.
From earthquakes to ship wakes (waves created by boats),
many forces create ocean waves. However, the most common
force is wind. As wind passes over the water, it pushes on
the ocean’s surface, causing it to vibrate. That vibration creates
a disturbance or ripple on the ocean surface. The strength of
the wind, the fetch (uninterrupted distance the wind blows),
and the duration of the gust determine how big the ripples
become. During severe storms, the ripples can grow to waves
50 feet high.
A wave has several distinct parts. The crest is the portion
above the still water line and highest point on a wave; the
trough, or valley between two waves, is the lowest point.


HEIGHT
CREST
TROUGH
LENGTH
OCEANOGRAPHY 17
.Earth and the Sea
The horizontal distance between the crests or troughs of two
waves is called the wavelength. The vertical distance between
the crest and the trough is the wave height. The wave period
measures the period of time between two waves. You can deter-
mine the wave period by picking a point, say a rock or pier or
buoy, and counting the seconds it takes for two waves to pass
by. There—you’re an oceanographer already!
Long, far-apart waves in the open ocean are known as
swells. They travel faster than locally generated waves or chop.
As a swell approaches shallow water, the ocean floor begins to
affect the wave’s shape and speed. Wave height increases and
the crests become more peaked. As the steepness of the wave
increases, the forward speed of the crest becomes faster than
the speed of the wave, and the wave breaks.
Waves that break into foam are called breakers. Ocean
swells breaking on the shore are called surf. There are different
types of breakers; the most common are surging, plunging, and
spilling waves. Where the beach slope is steep, surging breakers
roll in and hardly break at all. On less steep beaches, plunging
breakers curl over in a tube shape and finally break on the beach.
These waves are great for surfing!
Storm Surges, Tsunamis, and Tidal Bores
The strong winds of a hurricane or storm push seawater toward
the shore. This advancing water may combine with normal tides
to create a storm surge, which can increase the tide level 15 feet or
higher. In addition, wind-driven waves roll in on top of the storm
In deep water, even though a wave may be passing through, the
surface may hardly move. That is because what is actually moving
forward in a wave is energy passed through water, not water
itself. If you watch a boat floating on water, you will notice that it
goes up and down with the passing waves. The wave form moves
along the surface of the water, but the boat stays in place.
On beaches with
gentle slopes,
spilling waves
break far from the
shore, and the surf
gently cascades
down the front
of the wave as it
comes in.


18 OCEANOGRAPHY
Earth and the Sea.
surge, adding to the destructive power. Storm surges can cause
severe coastal flooding, especially if the storm surge happens at
high tide. Because so much of the U.S. population lives on the
East and Gulf Coasts, many in locations just above sea level, the
danger from storm surge is tremendous.
Occasionally, underwater disturbances such as volcanic
eruptions, earthquakes, or landslides create monster waves
called tsunamis. Reaching heights of 120 feet (37 meters) or
more, tsunamis are the most dramatic and destructive of waves.
The larger the underwater disturbance, the larger the tsunami.
They have been called tidal waves, but their formation has
nothing to do with the tides.
In 2004, a powerful earthquake in the Indian Ocean caused a tsunami to hit island
nations and coastal areas all over the region, from Southeast Asia to Africa. It resulted
in mass destruction and more than 225,000 deaths.
Tidal bores can push back rivers feeding into the inlet, making the rivers
appear to run backward. A precise combination of conditions must occur
for a tidal bore to form, so this phenomenon takes place in only a few
places around the world, such as Canada’s Bay of Fundy and the Amazon
River in South America.


OCEANOGRAPHY 19
.Earth and the Sea
In the open ocean, tsunamis are hard to spot. Their long
wavelengths mask their monstrous size, but like smaller waves,
tsunamis change when they enter shallow water. Their wave-
length shortens, and their crests rise to their full height. The
strength of the underwater disturbance, the tsunami’s wave-
length, and the shape of the coastline all contribute to the
tsunami’s height and destructiveness.
Tidal bores are waves or walls of water that race up an inlet
as the tide comes in. While not completely understood, tidal
bores usually occur in V-shaped inlets that shallow up along
their length. Wider at the opening and shallower at the head,
these inlets force incoming water to collect in the middle.
A wall of water then rushes up the inlet.
Waves and Coastal Formation
Waves form and shape coastlines. Wave erosion creates some
of the world’s most spectacular landforms, including sea
caves, wave-cut notches, and coastal cliffs. Often it smoothes
sandy beaches and forms barrier
islands like North Carolina’s
Outer Banks.
Breaking waves can deposit or
carry away sand and soil. This is
known as deposition or erosion of
sediment. As waves batter the coast,
they erode and grind away the shore.
Rocks and cliffs undercut by wave
action fall into the sea and are ground
and weathered into sand. The coast-
line’s resistance to erosion determines
its shape.
The ocean constantly reshapes
beaches and replenishes the sand.
Sediment deposits move along the
seashore as every wave hits. Since
the wind blows from different direc-
tions, waves rarely approach the coast
head-on. As waves strike the shore, the
swash (landward movement of water)
carries sand to the beach at an angle.
The backwash (seaward movement of
water) returns sand straight out to the
Powerful water action carves steep
and rugged seashores like this
California coastline.
Rocky headlands
are harder to
erode than sandy
beaches. Thus,
headlands jut out
into the sea, and
sandy beaches
curve away from
the sea.


Formation of longshore current
NET DIRECTION
OF BEACH DRIFT BEACH
LONGSHORE
CURRENT
SHORELINE
WAVE
FRONTS
20 OCEANOGRAPHY
Earth and the Sea.
Rip Currents
Rip currents can carry a swimmer many
yards offshore. Weak swimmers may
panic and need help before they exhaust
themselves trying to swim to shore
against the current. To escape the grip of
a rip current, the person should swim
across the current, parallel to the beach
and, when clear, swim for shore.
All waves use up
their energy at
the shore. Waves
may break farther
seaward on
sandbars or reefs.
ocean. Any sand carried by a wave that is not left on the beach
is carried to the ocean by the backwash. There it settles on the
seabed until another landward wave deposits it on the beach.
This movement of sediment down the beach is called beach drift.
When waves hit the coast, some of the water flows along the
beach, creating a longshore or littoral current. The current moves
beach sediment in the water, a movement known as longshore
drift. The combined movement of sediment via longshore drift
and beach drift is called littoral drift.
The strength of the longshore current increases as the size
of the waves and the approach angle increase. When the current
grows strong enough to overcome the force of incoming waves,
the water will flow seaward in a riptide, or rip current. A rip
current can carry large amounts of sand and sediment away from
the beach. If incoming waves do not return the sand, the beach
gradually will wear away.


JETTIES GROINS BREAKWATERS
OCEANOGRAPHY 21
.Earth and the Sea
The coasts you see today are the result of millions of years
of geological evolution. People also have affected the shape of
the shorelines by damming inland rivers and building barriers
and other structures in the ocean. Dams on inland rivers dimin-
ish the amount of sand streaming into the sea. Breakwaters are
structures built parallel to the shore to break the action of waves
or to provide a calm harbor for boats. Groins angle away from
the shoreline. Jetties, or piers, jut out perpendicular to the shore.
These structures protect beaches by altering sediment deposits
caused by inshore currents. Piers also jut out perpendicular to
beaches and provide landings for vessels.
Given enough time, wave erosion will create a smooth coastline.
How quickly the sea erodes a shoreline also depends on the amount
of energy released by the waves as they approach the coast or shore.
Artificial structures
designed to break
wave action block
the migration of
sand and sediment,
causing some
beaches to grow
while others erode.


COASTAL
CLIFFS
DUNES
BERM BERM
LOW-TIDE
TERRACE
LONGSHORE
TROUGH
HIGH TIDE
LOW TIDE
LONGSHORE
BAR
22 OCEANOGRAPHY
Earth and the Sea.
A coastline’s topography depends on the types of waves
that hit the shore, the height of the tides, and the composition
of the sediment and sand deposited on the surface. Coastal cliffs
or steep banks may descend to dunes. The high point above
the beach is the berm, a ridge formed by storm waves where
seashells collect. The portion of the shore between the high-tide
mark, usually a line of debris and seaweed, and the low-tide
mark is the foreshore. If you wade ankle-deep into the sea at low
tide, you will walk along the low-tide terrace, formed by the level-
ing action of low-tide waves. Further into the sea, you might find
a longshore trough of water flowing parallel to the shore.
On the far side of the trough may be a sandbar or offshore
bar. Sandbars are submerged or partially exposed humps of
sand or coarse sediment built by the wave action of tides and
currents. They frequently form in the heavy surf of the storm
seasons but often are hidden in the deeper water. Breaking
waves erode the tops of offshore bars.
On most ocean
shores, high tide
occurs regularly
every 12 hours,
25 minutes. This
means each new
tide—high or
low—occurs
a little later
each day.
General characteristics of a beach.
Berms are flat portions of a beach
formed by wave action. The two shown
here were formed in previous storms.
Not all ocean waves occur on the surface of the water. Internal waves
occur within the ocean, between layers of water of different densities
(imagine mixing oil with water), often when a tide containing these
layers runs into some disruptive topographical feature on the ocean
floor. The resulting waves can reach heights above 300 feet (91 meters),
much higher than typical surface waves. Internal waves can influence the
amount and diversity of nutrients available and the water temperature in
an area. They can also hinder the monitoring of underwater environments
and endanger submersibles.


.Earth and the Sea
Beach waves excavate the longshore trough, and the swash
deposits sand on the beach. Backwash and riptides move sand
seaward to form sandbars, which may migrate shoreward in
gentle seas and seaward in high seas. Landward waves add more
sediment to the sand mass as they approach the shore.
Tides
The gravitational pull of the moon (and, to a smaller degree, the
sun) on the sea causes ocean tides. In most parts of Earth, this
pull produces two high tides and two low tides each day. As
Earth rotates beneath the bulging waters, a high tide occurs,
then a low tide, then another high tide and another low tide.
The tilt of the moon’s orbit gives the two daily high tides and
the two daily low tides different heights.
Upwelling
Because the oceans have so much mass, they resist moving. Thus,
only winds blowing over the water for long distances and for long
periods of time are capable of generating ocean currents. The Gulf
Stream is a warm current that flows from the Caribbean toward
northern Europe on the western side of the Atlantic Ocean. Winds
in the central part of the Atlantic drive this current. Along the east-
ern sides of the Atlantic, winds blowing in the direction of the
equator push surface water offshore replacing colder, deeper ocean
water. This process is called oceanic upwelling, and the nutrient-
rich water that rises to the surface with the cold water helps
support the abundant marine life of the Atlantic.





OCEANOGRAPHY 25
.Our Liquid Planet
Our Liquid Planet
The most common substance on Earth is water. It also is very
unique. No other substance on Earth acts or reacts like water.
Properties of Water
Water is colorless, tasteless, odorless, and wet. It serves as a
cleaning agent, a heat absorber, a sound transmitter, a shaper
of shorelines, and the medium upon which ships set sail and
hurricanes brew.
At Earth’s normal temperatures, only water can exist as a
solid, a liquid, or a gas—ice, water, or water vapor. Water mol-
ecules are always moving; whether water appears as a solid,
liquid, or gas depends on how fast they move. Ice molecules
remain relatively distant and motionless. Liquid water molecules
lie close together and move about. Water vapor molecules move
rapidly and collide. Since water molecules are always moving,
those at the surface break free of those below and enter the air
as vapor. This process is called evaporation.
On Earth, water exists primarily as liquid. No other common
substance stays liquid at room temperature. Between 32°F (its
freezing point) and 212°F (its boiling point), water remains liquid.
A drop of water
consists of many
millions of tiny
particles called
molecules. Each
molecule consists
of even smaller
particles called
atoms. Two atoms
of hydrogen
combine with one
atom of oxygen to
form water—H20.
As most substances grow colder they contract (become
smaller). But water is highly unusual. It contracts
only until its temperature reaches 39 degrees, then
it expands! For this reason, a can of soda left in the
freezer will burst. Similarly, when ice forms on the sea,
it floats. If water contracted when it froze, ice would
sink and pile up on the ocean bottom. Summer’s
warmth could not reach deep enough to melt it so
the seas would gradually freeze, killing all life on Earth.
Thank goodness water is the way it is!


26 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Liquid Planet.
Water has a great variety
of characteristics.
Among them:
Water can hold considerable
heat. The ability to hold
heat is called heat capacity.
Only ammonia has a greater
capacity to hold heat
than water.
Water has surface tension. Surface molecules cling together so tightly
that water can support objects heavier than itself. For example, insects
may walk on water and pine needles may float.
Water is a solvent. Over time, ocean waves can dissolve even massive
ocean cliffs. Water also dissolves nutrients on land that eventually find
their way to rivers and into the sea. Inside an animal’s body, water also
helps dissolve food and carry it to the animal’s cells. Because so many
substances will dissolve in water, pure water cannot be found in nature.
Ocean Salinity
About 97 percent of all Earth’s water is salty. What makes
the ocean salty? It is no surprise that the main compound
giving seawater its salty taste is the same salt we use on
French fries—sodium chloride. But seawater also contains
other salts such as magnesium chloride, magnesium sulfate,
and calcium sulfate.
The amount of salts dissolved in ocean water is called
salinity. Scientists use salinometers to measure the salt content
of water. Salinity is measured in units called parts per thousand,
or ppt. The average salinity of the world’s oceans is 35 ppt.
Some areas of the oceans are saltier than others. Factors
that influence seawater’s saltiness include rate of evaporation,
amount of rainfall, and how many rivers and streams pour into
the sea nearby. Over time, rivers and streams carry great quan-
tities of sediments and salts into the sea. On the other hand,
rivers can also dilute the sea with freshwater. Some weather
conditions such as hurricanes or tropical storms affect salinity
because winds can sprinkle salts over water.
If you want to
make your own
ocean water, you
will need to add
35 parts of salt to
965 parts of water.
That may not
seem like much
salt, but mix up
a batch and
have a taste!


OCEANOGRAPHY 27
.Our Liquid Planet
Temperature affects the amount of salt that water can hold.
Warm water holds more dissolved solids, including salts, than
cool water. Areas around the equator have warm temperatures
and high evaporation. Few large rivers pour into the sea at the
equator. Thus, seas around Earth’s middle tend to be saltier
than other oceans. Other areas, like the Gulf of Alaska, have a
low rate of evaporation, a high precipitation rate, and a large
number of freshwater rivers dumping their water into the ocean,
lowering the average salinity.
How did all that salt get into the oceans? When oceans
first formed on Earth, they were entirely freshwater. But for
the several billion years since, continuous steady erosion of
lands and mountains has carried salts and minerals to the sea.
Gradually, the ocean’s salinity has increased. Evaporation of
seawater concentrated the salts even more. When seawater
evaporates, the salt stays behind and the water becomes more
saline. Evaporated seawater forms into clouds that rain down on
the land again, picking up more salts and minerals, and flowing
once more to the sea. Again, some of that water evaporates and
leaves more salts behind, slowly increasing the ocean’s salinity.
Ocean Temperature
Ocean temperatures vary from the warm seas at the equator to
the bone-chilling waters of the Arctic and Southern Oceans.
Oceanographers use an electronic instrument known as an
STD (salinity, temperature, depth) to measure ocean temperatures
within 4,000 feet (1,219 meters) of the surface. In the mid-1970s,
the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration
started using satellites to measure
ocean temperatures. With a single
pass of a satellite, scientists could
get sea surface temperature data
from New England to Florida.
Over the course of a few days,
they could record the temperatures
of all oceans worldwide. Satellite
technology has certain limitations
in that it records only the tempera-
ture in the top inch or so of the
ocean surface and is limited by
cloud cover. Iceberg
The oceans act
as gigantic heat
distributors,
keeping the
cold areas of
Earth warmer and
the warm areas
colder. Without
the oceans, the
deserts would
enlarge and
the polar caps
would contract.


28 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Liquid Planet.
Ocean Density
Ocean density is the weight of seawater divided by the amount
of space it occupies. Factors affecting seawater density include
temperature, salinity, and pressure. Oceanographers express the
density of seawater in grams per cubic centimeter. Seawater
density increases as temperature decreases. Cold, salty water is
much denser than warm, fresher water and will sink below the
less-dense layer. Varying densities of seawater can create deep
ocean currents and internal waves.
Gifts From the Sea
The ocean provides what people need: food, energy, minerals,
medicine, and—of course—water.
The worldwide commercial fish and shellfish catch
exceeds 200 billion pounds annually, most from waters near the
coasts. Most fish and shellfish are harvested directly for food.
Processors use the rest to make products such as fish oil and
fishmeal to feed livestock and pets, and for fertilizer.
To support the high demand for fish, hatcheries produce
salmon and other fry for ocean release. Fish farming, also called
aquaculture or mariculture, produces fish, shellfish, and seaweeds
near ocean shores.
The ocean is a source for energy. Offshore
wells around the world tap deposits of oil and gas
beneath the seafloor. Currently, these wells produce
about 25 percent of the world’s oil and about 20
percent of the world’s gas. Ocean tides also provide
energy. Tidal power facilities use the rise and fall of
the tides to help produce electricity.
Density increases as pressure increases. Water weighs
a lot; just fill two buckets full of water and carry them a
hundred yards to demonstrate. Imagine the weight of
a mile or two of water over your head. All that weight
pushes down on the water deep in the sea and makes
it denser. The average depth of the ocean is more than
12,000 feet (3,658 meters), which is more than 2 miles.
So if you are feeling pressured, imagine the pressure
deep-sea creatures must feel!


OCEANOGRAPHY 29
.Our Liquid Planet
At undersea plate boundaries, vast accumulations of
minerals form. Deposits near the hydrothermal vents contain
copper, iron, and zinc. In certain areas, huge quantities of
manganese collect on the ocean floor in lumps called nodules.
Some undersea mining has begun, and large-scale undersea
mining holds promise for the future.
Many forms of marine life contribute to modern medicine.
Red alga provides an anticoagulant that keeps blood from
clotting. One species of marine snail produces a substance
used in muscle relaxants. Giant nerve cells from lobsters,
squids, and marine worms help researchers learn more about
nerve functions in people.
Seawater provides an inexhaustible supply of water.
However, the salt must be removed before drinking it, or it
will cause dehydration. This process—called desalinization—
is costly, but it assures us that we can always get freshwater
if we live near the ocean.
Medicines and Chemicals From the Sea
The sea supplies a surprising number of modern medicines and chemicals.
In fact, scientists scour the seas for medicines that may work better than
those we now use. Fish oils reverse symptoms of arthritis and heart
disease. Corals provide material for bone replacements. A polymer
extracted from
shellfish strengthens
paper, improves
cosmetics, stiffens
hair gels, and helps
prevent scarring.
The next time you
visit the beach,
remember that the
shells you see may
turn out to be the
wonder treatments
of tomorrow. Researchers use crustaceans—including lobsters—to
learn more about how nerves function.
Know someone
who is losing hair?
Fish protein may
be the cure
for baldness.


30 OCEANOGRAPHY
The Oceans and the Atmosphere.
The Oceans and
the Atmosphere
Two great systems envelop Earth—one is the
ocean and the other is the atmosphere, or air.
Both are constantly in motion, driven by the
sun’s energy and pulled by gravity. Each com-
pletely interacts with the other, giving and taking
moisture, heat, and energy. Together, the oceans and
the atmosphere affect climate and weather patterns
around the world.
A Global Heat Absorber
The sun is Earth’s main source of energy. The oceans, covering
more than 70 percent of the planet’s surface and darker than
the continents, absorb roughly half of the solar (sun) radiation
that strikes Earth. They store heat better than air and land do.
Warm seawater mixes with cool seawater, thereby holding the
heat energy.
Winds blowing over the warm ocean surface remove water
vapor and heat. When the vapor condenses and falls as rain
or snow, the heat energy released into the atmosphere causes
the air to warm. As air warms, it rises. Then cold air flows to
replace it. Sunlight heats the air unevenly. Air at the equator
receives more sunlight and gets hotter than air at the poles.
As hot air rises at the equator, colder air from the North and
South poles rushes toward the equator to replace it.
Because Earth rotates, air does not flow in a north-south
path, but is twisted. In the northern hemisphere, currents
of air move clockwise. In the southern hemisphere,
currents of air move counterclockwise. This phenomenon
is called the Coriolis effect.


OCEANOGRAPHY 31
.The Oceans and the Atmosphere
Great wind circulation systems form. Close to the equator,
trade winds blow from the east. In the temperate zone, steady
winds called westerlies blow from the west.
Winds blowing across the ocean’s surface create currents.
When the trade winds and westerlies blow across the oceans,
they cause the currents in each ocean basin to move in a
circular pattern.
Both surface and deepwater currents affect the world’s
climate by moving warm air from the tropics toward the poles,
and cold air from the poles toward the tropics. For example,
the Gulf Stream carries warm waters to northwestern Europe
and Great Britain. As a result, London experiences much
milder winters than New York City, even though Great Britain
is situated at a higher latitude. As oceans circulate heat, they
regulate Earth’s temperatures.
Deep Ocean Currents
Latitude affects the temperature of ocean water. Cold winds
blowing across the ocean at high latitudes (far in the north and
far in the south) cool and evaporate the water. If the water is
cold enough, sea ice will form. Because salts are left behind
when sea ice forms, the cold water becomes denser and sinks
deep into the ocean. The sinking and spreading of cold water
is known as thermohaline circulation, or deep ocean currents.
Scientists have known about this very cold water in the
ocean basins (even at the tropics) for a long time. There is much
more of this deepwater than there is of surface water. While
deep ocean currents are not as strong as those of the surface
water, they are nonetheless important in ocean mixing, a way
for seawater carrying dissolved gases and important nutrients
to mix with nutrient-poor seawater.
So what does the atmosphere have to do with deep ocean
currents? When clouds—which are part of the atmosphere—
block the sun’s rays from the ocean, the ocean cools. These
same clouds also might bring rain, which is fresh water. The
freshwater reduces the salinity of the ocean. Winds blow in and
evaporate some of the ocean water, and when the water vapor
rises, the salt stays behind. Temperature, precipitation, and wind
thus affect density, which affects deep ocean currents.


32 OCEANOGRAPHY
The Oceans and the Atmosphere.
The Sea and the Greenhouse Effect
The ocean absorbs and dissolves various gases from the
atmosphere, including oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon dioxide.
It can hold enormous quantities of dissolved gases because it
has so much dense cold water. The oceans are the main reser-
voir of dissolved carbon dioxide, an important greenhouse gas.
Greenhouse gases are those that affect Earth’s surface
temperature. These gases include carbon dioxide, methane, and
water vapor. Many people overlook water vapor as a greenhouse
gas, but it is the major reason why humid regions in the world
experience less cooling at night than do dry regions. Greenhouse
gases trap and hold the sun’s heat. Without these gases, the
average temperature of Earth would drop below the freezing
point of water.
Some environmental scientists are concerned that changes
in the atmosphere may be affected by or may be intensified by
human activities and could cause Earth’s surface to warm to a
dangerous degree. This effect is called global warming. These
scientists say even a limited rise in average surface temperature
could lead to a partial melting of the polar ice caps and glaciers,
which would cause a major rise in sea level, along with other
severe environmental disturbances. They believe global warm-
ing could cause significant changes to habitats and weather
patterns, which could endanger plants and animals.
Some scientists say that in
recent decades, there has been
a global increase in atmospheric
carbon dioxide because people
have been burning fossil fuels
(coal, oil, and natural gas). If the
present global climate remains
constant, they say the increase
in carbon dioxide from all this
burning could raise the average
temperature at Earth’s surface.
Warm air can contain more
water than cooler air can, so a
warmer atmosphere will hold
more water vapor. The scien-
tists believe this cyclical process
might continue to raise the tem-
perature at Earth’s surface.
Despite their
incomplete
understanding
of the effects of
methane, natural
trace gases,
and industrial
pollutants, many
scientists believe
that the rise in
global temperatures
in recent years
is a result of the
greenhouse effect.


OCEANOGRAPHY 33
.The Oceans and the Atmosphere
We still have a lot to learn about the role of oceans in the
atmospheric carbon cycle. While about half of the carbon dioxide
produced by burning fossil fuels and by deforestation is dissolved
in the ocean—slowing global warming—temperatures have, on
the average, been rising. Moreover, the excess carbon dioxide
entering the ocean lowers its pH, and the resulting acidification
threatens organisms with calcium carbonate shells and skeletons
and coral reefs.
El Niño
El Niño (ehl NEEN yoh) is a warm current in the Pacific
Ocean that flows southward along South America’s
west coast. It usually lasts nine to 12 months and
returns on average every four years. Normally deep,
cold Pacific waters well up to the surface off the
Peruvian and Ecuadorian coast, bringing up nutrients
and chilling surface waters and causing climatic
changes worldwide. A powerful El Niño in 1982 and
1983 caused severe drought in Australia and Indonesia
and an unusually large number of storms in California.
During the 1997–98 El Niño, heavy rains caused flood-
ing in Peru, Ecuador, and Argentina; monsoons and
cyclones struck Madagascar; and severe storms pelted
Texas and the Southeast. More recent El Niño events
in 2003 and 2006 were not as devastating.
El Niño is the focus of many studies. Scientists
believe El Niño is related to a shift in air movements
over the tropical Pacific Ocean. Changes in wind direc-
tion cause changes in the circulation and temperature
of the ocean, which in turn further disrupt air move-
ments and ocean currents. The location of warm and
cold pools of surface ocean water may also influence
the location, movement, and intensity of storm systems
in the atmosphere.
La Niña (lah
NEEN yah),
El Niño’s cold
counterpart, has
similarly important
effects on weather
patterns. It is
associated with
drought in the
southern United
States and
enhanced
hurricane activity
in the North
Atlantic Ocean,
for instance.





OCEANOGRAPHY 35
.Our Living Sea
Our Living Sea
A rich assortment of living things calls the ocean home. Big and
small, long and short, multicolored and drab, active and inactive,
sea life ranges from microscopic plankton to the largest creatures
on Earth. Some organisms even light up, like ghostly neon lights.
Zones of Life
The sea is so vast that scientists have divided it into zones. The
pelagic zone includes all the environments of the ocean above
the bottom, or living in open oceans or seas rather than in
waters next to land or inland waters. It is divided into an
inshore neritic zone (the zone of shallow water adjoining the
seacoast) and the open-sea oceanic zone. The boundary
between them occurs at the edge of the continental shelf.
The oceanic zone is divided further according to how deep
sunlight penetrates.
Planktonic plants occur only in the neritic and epipelagic
zones but provide food to animals living in the water and on
the bottom. Open-ocean life forms are called pelagic; bottom-
dwelling life forms are called benthic. The benthonic zone
is subdivided into three bottom zones: the littoral,
bathyal, and abyssal.
Plants grow only in the sunlit zone, the only
ocean layer that absorbs enough sunlight for pho-
tosynthesis. Animals live in all the oceanic zones,
although because of the availability of food, more of
them are found near the ocean’s surface. The sunlit
zone is very shallow compared to the bathyal or
abyssal zones.


36 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Living Sea.
• The epipelagic zone—more commonly called the
sunlit zone—is the top section of the ocean. This is
the only section shallow enough for sunlight to
penetrate, allowing photosynthesis (discussed later)
to take place.
• The mesopelagic zone—also called the twilight
zone—is dimly lit. There are no plants in this
zone because it does not get enough sunlight to
generate photosynthesis.
• Some call the bathypelagic zone the midnight zone.
No sunlight penetrates this area of the ocean because
it’s too deep—about 21/2 miles down. The only light
that this deep ocean layer gets comes from biolumi-
nescent marine life.
• In the abyssal zone, the ocean’s lowest layer, it is
pitch-black and—since it is unaffected by weather—
calm. The temperature is nearly freezing at this depth,
around 6,600 to 20,000 feet (2,012 to 6,096 meters)
below the ocean’s surface.
• The hadal zone comprises the ocean’s deepest waters,
found in its narrow trench walls and floors—some
deeper than 6 miles (nearly 10 kilometers).
Life Near the Surface
Food is most abundant in the sunlit zone. There, the majority of
ocean life finds the food sources needed to survive—mostly in
the form of microscopic algae.
The Intertidal Zone and Intertidal Invertebrates
Abundant and varied plant and animal life thrive in intertidal
communities between the high and low tides of marine coasts.
Factors such as the type of rock, type of sand or soil, water
temperature, protection from waves, and the interactions
between organisms determine what an intertidal community
is like. Intertidal communities are rich in life, especially in
invertebrates—animals such as clams, mussels, starfish, and
others that do not have a backbone or spinal column.


OCEANOGRAPHY 37
.Our Living Sea
The invertebrate group is one of two
general categories of animals. The other
group, vertebrates, includes those animals
that do have backbones (fishes, amphib-
ians, reptiles, birds, and mammals).
Invertebrates occupy all habi-
tats—even deep-sea trenches—and are
found in all types of sea-bottom sedi-
ments, from soft oozes to rocky bottoms.
Swimming invertebrates survive at all
depths and include forms developed to
live in the sunless waters of the deep sea as
well as near the surface. Invertebrates exist
in fresh, brackish (slightly salty), and marine
environments. Some specialized forms also thrive
in extremely salty seawater such as lagoons along tropical
coasts and pools high in the intertidal zone.
Splash and the Upper Intertidal Zones
In the intertidal zone, the area highest above the
waves is the splash zone, which is just reached by
the ocean’s salty spray. Animals living in this zone,
such as shore crabs and sand fleas, are primarily
adapted to life above the waves. Only a few hardy
animals live in splash pools, which dry up in sum-
mer and flood with freshwater runoff in winter.
Below this zone lies the upper intertidal zone
with its scattered covering of green and brown
seaweed. Here, snails and limpets scour rocks in
search of microscopic algae. Barnacles cover the
rocks except where predators and winter storms
have cleared them away. Because barnacles cement
themselves to the rocks and close when the tide is
out, they are well-adapted to this zone.
Marine invertebrates include the giant squid, which can
measure up to 65 feet (20 meters) long and weigh 2
tons or more. Since invertebrate simply means “with-
out a backbone,” in number of species, this category
constitutes almost the entire animal kingdom.
Organisms in
the sub tide zone
are fragile and
cannot tolerate
much exposure
to the air or sun.


38 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Living Sea.
Mid- and Low Intertidal Zones
Below these two zones, in the mid-intertidal zone,
a broad band of mussels often forms a bed several
inches thick. The common starfish continually
feeds on mussels, which would otherwise abound
throughout all the available mid-intertidal space.
Many worms, snails, and crabs live within the
mussel bed. The mid-intertidal zone is covered
and uncovered twice a day by the tides. Animals
in this zone have adapted to being immersed in air
and seawater.
The diverse plants and animals of the low
intertidal zone include red algae and large kelp,
which clings to the rocky bottom with holdfasts.
The kelp’s large leaves move with the waves,
and the kelp beds protect the sea urchins, worms,
snapping shrimp, and porcelain crabs preyed
upon by the giant sunflower starfish.
Sandy beaches, while fun for sunbathers,
provide limited habitat for marine and shore
animals. Those that are there, though, are often
found in abundance, especially crabs, clams,
and beach hoppers.
Coastal Marshes
The quiet waters of bays and river mouths
are lined with grassy marshes. In these
marshes, fiddler crabs undercut the
banks while oyster banks fill the
lower edges of the intertidal marshes,
sheltering crabs and snails. Clams,
shrimp, and worms burrow into
mud flats for nutrition and protec-
tion. These animals eat by filtering
the water at high tide or by scouring
the mud bottom for tiny food particles.
The holes they make provide habitat for
shrimp, tiny crabs, and small fish.


OCEANOGRAPHY 39
.Our Living Sea
Sediments in an
estuary come
from rivers and
the ocean.
As tidal currents
push sand into
an estuary, rivers
drop sediments.
Over time,
estuaries fill with
soil and disappear.Estuaries
Estuaries are river valleys flooded by the sea. It’s where fresh-
water and seawater mix. When the sea level rises or the land
subsides, the sea can cover parts of the coast. An estuary like
Chesapeake Bay on the East Coast of the United States has an
average depth of about 13 feet, despite the deep channel down
its center. Estuaries provide a rich habitat for shellfish that live
in salty water. In the inner bays of the estuary, less dense river
water flows over denser seawater.
Beds of seaweed provide a habitat for many animals. Some
seaweeds, such as sea lettuce (shown here) and dulse, are
used as ingredients in human foods or as garden fertilizer.


40 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Living Sea.
LAGOON
ATOLL
FRINGING REEF
LAND MASS
LAND MASS
LAGOON BARRIER REEF
Seaweeds
Seaweeds are algae that grow in the sea. Red and
brown algae are the most common, although a few
green algae also are included. Seaweeds usually
attach themselves to rocks or to the ocean bottom.
Mats of seaweed are often carried and left on a
beach by high tides. Although seaweeds thrive at
depths of up to 100 feet (30 meters), some red
algae grow as deep as 600 feet (183 meters).
Coral Reefs
A coral reef is a rise or mound of coral, coral sands,
or solid limestone at or below sea level. Coral may
make up less than half of the reef; other organisms
such as mollusks (snails or clams), zooplankton,
and sponges form the rest. Finally, coralline algae commonly
help to bind these organisms together to form the framework of
the coral reef.
Coral reefs have three forms: fringing reefs, barrier reefs, and
atolls. In tropical areas, fringing reefs form just offshore, separated
from land by shallow water. In other areas, barrier reefs form far
from land, separated by water more than 30 feet (9 meters) deep.
Atolls, found far offshore, are rings of coral encircling a lagoon.
Types of coral reefs


Darwin’s theory of the formation of an atoll
Active
volcano
Fringing reef
Barrier reef Atoll
CORAL REEFS ON
SIDE OF VOLCANO
SINKING VOLCANO
REEFS GROW UPWARD
SINKING VOLCANO FURTHER SINKING
LAGOON
DEAD
CORAL
OCEANOGRAPHY 41
.Our Living Sea
How Coral Reefs Form
During his scientific expedition aboard the HMS Beagle from 1831
to 1836, Charles Darwin developed a theory about how coral reefs
form. First, a volcano grows thousands of feet from the ocean floor
to rise above the surface of the ocean. It becomes a volcanic island
surrounded by shallow water. A shelf of coral extending from the
shore forms a fringing reef around the volcano top.
This giant clam, left, was spotted at Australia’s Great Barrier Reef, right, which is the
world’s largest coral reef.


42 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Living Sea.
Gradually, the volcano sinks, but the coral continues to grow. As
the volcano continues to sink, the reef becomes separated from the
landmass by a lagoon. It is now a barrier reef. Finally, the volcano
disappears far below the ocean’s surface and leaves only an atoll,
a ring of coral with a lagoon at its center.
Coral reefs are largely made of the skeletons of colonial
corals. Not all corals form into reefs. Some live a solitary
existence, like their relatives, the sea anemones. Temperature,
water depth, salinity, and wave action all help determine the
growth and health of corals.
Tropical corals require waters warmer than 65°F. These reef
corals rely upon algae for nutrients and oxygen. Algae require
sunlight for photosynthesis. Tropical reefs, therefore, are found
in water shallow and clear enough for sunlight to penetrate.
The framework of the coral reef is provided by coral and
some minor organisms, then cemented by the coralline algae.
The loose sediment used in this framework is made up of eroded
reef rock, sand, gravel, and a small amount of silt and clay.
Cold-water reefs (also known as deepwater reefs), on the
other hand, exist in waters between 39°F and 54°F, at depths that
have limited or no sunlight. These reefs have not been studied
nearly as much as tropical reefs, and much is still unknown about
cold-water reefs. However, they are gaining more attention in
ocean research, and they continue to be discovered and explored
all over the world. Like their tropical counterparts, researchers
have found them to be home to a wide variety of organisms.
Coral Reef Life
Tropical coral reefs are usually
found in warm shallow waters
on the eastern coasts of continents
and around oceanic islands.
Most of the world’s tropical reefs
are found in the Indian and
Pacific Oceans and the Caribbean
Sea. Cold-water reefs are found
in colder, deeper waters.
Coral reefs benefit from heavy wave action. Waves
agitate the water, bring in food and oxygen, and
remove sediment.


OCEANOGRAPHY 43
.Our Living Sea
Numerous examples have been found in the Atlantic Ocean,
but they have also been found in the Indian and Pacific Oceans.
Coral reefs seem to have few plants, but reef-building corals
often house microscopic single-celled algae called zooxanthellae.
The zooxanthellae supply food through photosynthesis. The
association between coral and zooxanthellae benefits both. The
coral gives a place for the algae to form, and the algae provides
nutrients for the coral. Also, corals feed upon plankton and
organic debris.
Today, tropical and cold-water coral reefs in some parts of
the world are in peril. When stressed by pollution or a change in
temperature or sea quality, or for as yet undetermined reasons,
some reef corals expel the algae, weaken, and die. This condition
is known as “bleaching.” Human activities, such as tourism and
commercial fishing, also threaten the reefs. To make matters worse,
the rate of growth—and therefore recovery—of coral reefs is slow.
Because some corals must spread out in search of
light much like a tree grows branches, the association
between coral and algae explains why many coral reefs
grow like a forest. Corals spread out and compete for
light just like plants on land do. Just as with plants on
land, rapidly growing corals shade out slower growing
colonies, which eventually die.
This coral shows the effects of bleaching.


44 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Living Sea.
Plankton
The term plankton comes from the Greek word planktos, which
means “wanderer.” Plankton includes marine plants and animals
that drift with the currents. Because they drift, plankton differ
from nekton, animals that actively swim or lie on or burrow into
the seafloor, such as clams and worms. They also differ from
marine plants such as large seaweeds. Plankton cells are seldom
larger in diameter than a few tenths of an inch. Plankton forms
the basis of all major ocean food chains.
Plankton is denser than water and tends to sink. However,
because of their small size, long spines, shell extension, and the
ability to float, these drifters have adapted in different ways to
slow this sinking. Some planktonic animals rise toward the
surface at night and then sink to deeper waters during the day.
This vertical migration is probably tied to feeding strategies as
well as to the avoidance of predators. When plankton dies, it
sinks and contributes to the rich sediments at the bottom of
the sea.
Phytoplankton
Plant plankton, or phytoplankton, consists of single-celled algae.
Through photosynthesis, plankton supports the rest of all
marine life. Photosynthesis is the process plants use to convert
sunlight into food and release oxygen from carbon dioxide and
water. The amount of available light and nutrients affects phyto-
plankton production.
Besides sunlight, phytoplankton needs nutrients to survive.
Ocean mixing brings these nutrients up from the seafloor. Levels
of plankton tend to remain low and constant year-round in the
clear open ocean and tropical waters. Light can penetrate deeper
there, but storms have trouble churning up nutrient-rich bottom
sediments in deepwater. The most productive areas are where
surface currents lead away from land and mix with deep currents,
like the west coast of Ecuador and Peru and off western Africa.
Seawater absorbs sunlight. The deeper you go, the less
light is available. The depths of the sea are pitch-black.
Between the dark depths and the surface is the euphotic
zone, the layer of seawater that receives enough sun-
light for photosynthesis to occur and plants to grow.


OCEANOGRAPHY 45
.Our Living Sea
Zooplankton
Planktonic animals, or zooplankton, are divided into two groups.
Holoplankton spend their entire life cycle as plankton. These
include small crustaceans such as crabs, krill (the principal food
of baleen whales), and jellyfish. Meroplankton are plankton only
during the larva stage (the earliest stage of an animal, before it
changes and becomes an adult). These species, which include
shrimp, barnacles, worms, and marine fish such as herring
and anchovies, change dramatically as they grow. As many as
50,000 zooplankton may inhabit one gallon of seawater!
Ocean Food Chains
Flesh-eating animals are called carnivores, whereas plant-eating
animals are called herbivores. Those that eat both plants and meat
are called omnivores. In some way, all animals depend on photo-
synthesis to grow plants that help keep the food chain going.
As microscopic plants, phytoplankton claim the basic level
of the ocean food chain. Zooplankton graze on these phyto-
plankton. Copepods, larvae, and other tiny animals filter these
algal cells from the water. Larger zooplankton prey upon these
zooplankton and then become prey to even larger zooplankton.
Several levels of preying occur before a large fish such as a cod
or tuna appears in the ocean food chain.
Marine Birds
Marine birds have adapted to the ocean. Many of them possess
webbed feet. Others have glands that empty salt and excretory
systems that conserve water. Where food is abundant, marine
birds are as well. Each species has developed special features that
enable them to feed on different foods, nest in different places,
and remain active at different times of the day. This reduces
competition for food among marine birds. Though marine
birds feed on fish, squid, dead and floating fish, and
animals at sea, they must return to shore to nest.
Some marine birds possess fatty deposits and thin,
light bones and oil glands near their tails to waterproof
their feathers. Others have air sacs in the thorax, abdo-
men, and long bones of their legs and wings to help them
float. Many seabirds, such as penguins, use air trapped under
the feathers to insulate their bodies. Diving birds exhale from air
sacs and lungs, squeezing air from under their feathers, to push
below the surface. Their heart rate slows when they dive.
Marine birds
include stilt-
legged birds
such as herons
and egrets, terns
and skimmers,
gulls, cormorants,
pelicans, frigate
birds, pelagic
birds (which
spend nearly
their entire lives
beyond sight
of shore),
and penguins.


46 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Living Sea.
Seabirds are vital to the marine food web, feeding on fish
and adding droppings to water, fertilizing the sea and stimulat-
ing the growth of marine plants.
Ocean Fish
Though fish are cold-blooded, they are vertebrates (they have
backbones). But some fish are flat and lie on the bottom of the
ocean like halibut or swim upright like sea horses. All fish have
fins; virtually all have gills. Fishes range in size from tiny tropical
fish such as the pygmy goby of the Philippines, with adults as
small as your fingernail, to the whale shark, which grows to
60 feet long and weighs more than 20 tons.
Distribution of Ocean Fish. Fish inhabit the oceans from
the shallowest shoals to crushing depths 6 miles (almost
10 kilometers) deep. They are found from the balmy tropics
to the icy Antarctic, where the seawater is colder than ice.
Twenty thousand species of fish swim the seas, outnumbering
all the other vertebrate species combined.
Anatomy of Ocean Fish. Fish are composed of three classes:
the cartilaginous-skeleton fishes, such as sharks and rays; the
jawless fishes, such as sea lampreys; and the bony-skeleton
fishes, which are all the rest.
Fish extract oxygen from water. Most fish have gills, but some
have lungs or other ways to absorb oxygen, including through
their skin. Breathing underwater is harder work than breathing
above water. Water is dense and holds far less oxygen than air.
Penguins have blubber under their skin and scalelike feathers to help keep them warm
and survive harsh winters in the Antarctic, where the temperature can dip to -70°F.
Greater numbers
of fish occur near
coasts, where
the waters are
rich in nutrients.
There, sunlight
warms the
shallow waters,
and upwellings
from ocean depths
mix with nutrients
brought to sea by
rivers, providing
rich habitat.


OCEANOGRAPHY 47
.Our Living Sea
Scales protect the skin on a fish, but not all fish have them.
Scales are colorless and vary greatly between species.
In the sea, fish lose water and absorb salts. To offset this
loss of fluid, marine fishes drink seawater and produce very
little urine. The drinking of seawater, however, means that fish
accumulate more and more salt. This excess salt is eliminated
through the anus along with wastes. Some wastes are excreted
through the gills. Fish get rid of so much salt that their blood is
much less salty than seawater.
Marine Mammals
Marine mammals are animals that spend all or most of their time
in the ocean, where they find their food. Animals such as whales,
dolphins, porpoises, seals, sea lions, walruses, dugongs, manatees,
and sea otters are marine mammals. Like land mammals, they nurse
their young with milk produced by their bodies. The polar bear also
is considered a marine mammal because it is a proficient swimmer
and hunts primarily on sea ice for ringed and bearded seals.
Whales
Whales are the largest marine mammals. Extant (still existing)
whales include the baleen and toothed whales. The body of
most whale species is shaped like a torpedo. It uses its
front limbs mostly to steer and balance its large
body. The hind limbs have only a few bones.
Whales swim with help from the vertical
movements of their dorsal fin and tail fin,
which consists of a pair of horizontal
lobes called flukes.
Baleen Whales. The baleen whale has
no teeth and wouldn’t need them, any-
way, because it is primarily a plankton
feeder. It gets most of its nourishment
from tiny ocean organisms filtered
by a row of fringed plates of baleen,
or whalebone. The blue whale—at up
to 100 feet long and with an estimated
weight of more than 130 tons—is the largest
living animal and the largest animal that has
ever lived. Some other baleen whales include the
humpback, gray, and fin whales.
The pectoral fins
situated at the
front of the body
behind the gill
openings allow
fish to maneuver
and, if need be,
to hover in place.
Humpback whale


48 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Living Sea.
Toothed Whales. Toothed whales have sharp teeth, usually in
both jaws. They are predators, feeding on fish and squid. These
whales include the dolphin, sperm whale, narwhal, beluga,
porpoise, and killer whale. Possibly because of Herman
Melville’s novel Moby-Dick, the best-known toothed whale
is the sperm whale, which can grow to longer than 60 feet.
This whale has up to 80 cone-shaped teeth in its lower jaw;
each tooth fits into a socket in the upper jaw—it’s an amazing
predator. Other toothed whales include the following
• Narwhals are found along coasts and in rivers throughout
the Arctic. They feed on fish, octopus, and crabs. Eskimos
commonly hunt narwhals.
• Beluga whales inhabit the Arctic Ocean and
adjacent seas, in both deep offshore and
coastal waters. They may also enter rivers
that empty into far north seas.
• Orca whales are found in all seas from the
Arctic to the Antarctic. The largest of the dol-
phins, they attain a maximum length of about
31 feet and a weight of about 9 tons. The orca
whale is black, with white on the underparts,
above each eye, and on each flank. Orcas live
in pods, or social groups, usually of a few to
about 50 individuals. Orcas are sometimes
called “killer whales” because they are
aggressive hunters. Despite their nickname,
these whales have not been known to harm
humans in the wild.
Most small-toothed whales are
dolphins. They have a beak-like
snout and sharp, cone-shaped teeth
(like Flipper). People sometimes
mistake porpoises for dolphins.
Porpoises have a rounded snout,
chisel-shaped teeth, and a triangular
rather than hooked dorsal (top)
fin, and they usually are smaller
than dolphins. Porpoise
Orca whale


OCEANOGRAPHY 49
.Our Living Sea
THE DISTRIBUTION OF WHALES
Whales are found in all the oceans, from the tropics to the icy
northern and southern latitudes. Many whales migrate. The
migration paths of gray whales follow the longest round-trip
migration of any mammal, nearly 15,000 miles. The blue whale,
the sperm whale, and other whale species can be found in any
ocean the world over.
WHALE BEHAVIOR
Although little scientific evidence pinpoints any consistency in
the social behavior of whales, it is clear that most travel in
schools, also called pods or gams. Whales are very social and
seem to communicate through “songs” and other sounds they
broadcast in the water. You may have seen whales propel them-
selves completely into the air—a motion called “breaching.”
While it has not yet been proven, some believe breaching is
tied to the whale’s mating and other social behaviors.
Seals, Sea Lions, and Walruses
Seals, also known as earless seals, are classified with walruses
and the eared seals (sea lions and fur seals). Seals are especially
numerous in the colder waters (above 40 degrees latitude) of
both hemispheres, with concentrations in the polar regions.
Monk seals live in the warmer waters of the Caribbean and
Mediterranean Seas and Hawaii. The most numerous seal is
the crab-eater, with a population of more than 14 million.
Its thick layer of fat, or blubber, insulates the seal from the cold,
helps protect it from serious injuries, improves its ability to float,
and serves as a source of stored energy.


50 OCEANOGRAPHY
Our Living Sea.
The smallest seals are the ringed seals, which
reach an average length of about 3.5 feet and an
average weight of about 110 to 200 pounds. The
largest are the elephant seals, which can grow to
up to 21 feet long and weigh about 7,780 pounds.
The Weddell seal can dive as deep as 2000 feet and
remain underwater over an hour. Seals, sea lions, and
walruses usually eat fish, mollusks, crustaceans, and
squid. The leopard seal of Antarctica, however, eats
warm-blooded animals—including penguins
and other seals.
Life in the Deep Sea
All ocean waters beyond the continental shelf and below the level
of light penetration comprise the deep sea. While its conditions
are harsh, the deep sea is an enormous area—some 90 percent of
the ocean is deep sea. Because of the pressures, cold, and dark-
ness, the area is virtually inaccessible to humans, but it still
harbors life.
The Deep-Sea Environment, Hydrothermal Vents,
and Cold Seeps
Seawater weighs a lot. The deep sea experiences enormous
pressures, and it is cold and lightless. At any one depth, the
deep-sea environment is constant. The temperature stays
the same, the salinity remains the same; it is a chilling, yet
fascinating place. Surprisingly, except for the bottom of some
deep oceanic trenches, these chilling deep-sea waters still
contain enough oxygen to sustain life.
Though food is often scarce in the deep sea, nutrients drop
from the surface waters above or are brought in by ocean
currents from coastal areas. However, certain creatures count
on bacteria around hydrothermal vents and cold seeps, which
are found at several locations in the Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
In cold seeps, methane and sulfide-rich fluids seep from
the ocean floor. The cold seeps support organisms similar to
those supported by the hydrothermal vents. Unlike other
marine animals, these organisms (many are new to science)
do not depend on food sinking down because they can feed
off the nutrients present in the cold seeps.
Sea lion


OCEANOGRAPHY 51
.Our Living Sea
Hydrothermal vents are cracks in the ocean floor from which heated
water continually rises. They may be the main way Earth’s core loses heat.
Although the vents occur in the abyssal zone, they support communities
of unique species—including giant clams, limpets, mussels, and tube
worms up to 10 feet long—that are dependent on sulfur-digesting bacteria
for energy.
Deep-Sea Life Forms and Adaptations
Most plants cannot exist in the absence of light. However, the
deep sea contains a wide range of animals that can survive in
the great pressures. Most deep-sea fishes are much smaller than
their shallow-water relatives. But deep-sea crustaceans often
outsize those in shallower waters. Fishes of the shallower parts
of the deep sea may have very large eyes to catch what light is
available in the upper zones.
Bioluminescence
In the deeper zones, some species of both fishes and invertebrates,
such as marine bacteria, crustaceans, fish, fungi, jellyfish,
mollusks, protozoa, sponges, and worms, are able to produce
light. The production of light by living organisms is called biolu-
minescence. Many deep-sea fish have bulblike organs on their
bodies that may also attract mates or prey, or illuminate the
search for them in the perpetual darkness.
Luminous single-celled organisms called dinoflagellates are
the most common source of brilliant displays of light seen in the
ocean. One species may tint the sea surface pink in the daytime
and light it up at night. A ship plowing through tropic seas
may produce a wake that glows eerily as millions of these
organisms light up. Another source of light in tropical oceans
is the luminous jellyfish.
Deep-sea anglerfish have a rod on their heads with a “light” attached at the end.
Interestingly, the female grows up to 3 feet long, while the full-size male measures
only about 5 inches.
In some animal
species, their
glow is produced
by bacteria rather
than by the animals
themselves.
Colonies of
bacteria produce
light in anglerfish.


52 OCEANOGRAPHY
Adaptations of Deep-Sea Fishes
Since food in the deep sea is scarce, many deep-sea fishes have
large mouths that enable them to swallow prey species larger
and wider than themselves. Backward-curving teeth ensure that
the prey does not escape. Many fishes also have guts that expand
to digest meals larger than themselves.
Because of pressure effects, the body composition of
fishes and invertebrates in the deep sea differs from
that of shallow-water forms. The flesh of many deep-sea
animals is jellylike.
Our Living Sea.
The deep-sea gulper grows up to 2 feet long, and up to a quarter
of its length will be that of its mouth alone.
Blobfish


OCEANOGRAPHY 53
.Our Living Sea
Deep-sea tube worms
Studying Deep-Sea Organisms
Sampling and working with deep-sea organisms is not easy.
Getting to the deepest part of the sea and being able to bring
live organisms to the laboratory is extremely difficult.
Benthic (bottom) plants and animals are easier to study
because they either do not move or they move slowly. The
organisms of the bottom ooze are usually sea cucumbers,
brittle stars, small crustaceans, worms, and mollusks.
Whereas most benthic organisms feed on materials
drifting down, virtually all pelagic fishes and invertebrates
are carnivores in the deep sea. In the upper layers, many of
these animals migrate, moving toward the surface at night
and returning to the depths during the day.


Alvin, perhaps the most active and successful research submersible


OCEANOGRAPHY 55
.Technology and the Sea
Technology and the Sea
Humans have always depended on technology to explore
the oceans. Lighthouses guide sailors away from reefs, and
compasses, radio, and radar allow ships to chart their course.
Today, Global Positioning System (GPS) satellites tell mariners
their exact position. Sonar equipment, used to determine the
shape and depth of the ocean floor, also locates submerged
submarines and schools of fish.
Marine Research
Today’s oceanographers explore the oceans using research ships,
research submarines called submersibles, remote and autono-
mous sensing devices, and satellites. Using computers, they
compile and analyze the data collected. They can project trends
and create biological, geological, chemical, and atmospheric
models (mathematical representations) critical to understanding
the oceans.
Aquarius, an underwater laboratory in the Florida Keys, allows
researchers to participate in 10-day missions such as studying
the decline of coral reefs in the area.


56 OCEANOGRAPHY
Technology and the Sea.
Oceanographers might be at sea for days or weeks studying
marine life or ocean conditions. Many ships are laboratory-
equipped; a few carry marine submersibles. Though modern
ships are well outfitted, they often represent an inefficient way
to conduct research since they can only be in one place at a
time—often at great expense. Sometimes rough seas make for
uncomfortable conditions.
Oceanographers may use underwater camera or video
equipment. They take measurements using sonar, recording
sound waves echoing off the ocean floor to better understand
sea depth and seawater density. They may penetrate Earth’s
crust with sound to better understand undersea geology.
Oceanographers collect seawater samples from various depths
and measure the temperature, salinity, and other characteristics
of the samples. Nets towed behind research ships gather
samples of marine life for study.
Oceanographers use remote sensing devices to record data
over time or in difficult locations. Some devices float or drift on
ocean currents above or below the ocean’s surface, providing
important information about atmospheric pressure, water tem-
perature, and ocean currents. Some are anchored to the ocean
floor at a certain depth. Others record data over a long period
Orbiting satellites
may monitor dozens
of sensing devices
at once, providing
ongoing snapshots
of ocean currents.
The Seward Johnson I, a research vessel, is prepared to deploy
the submersible Johnson Sea-Link.


NOAA’s Okeanos Explorer is the
first U.S. ship devoted to ocean
exploration. Commissioned in
2008, this ship is equipped with
remotely operated vehicles to
investigate areas of interest and
has a sophisticated satellite system
to allow communication and inter-
action with researchers on land.
OCEANOGRAPHY 57
.Technology and the Sea
of time, so oceanographers and technicians are involved in
machine design and maintenance.
Some oceanographic vessels are equipped to drill into
Earth’s crust. Undersea rock, sediment, and core samples may
help scientists better understand the age, composition, and
development of the ocean floor.
Submersibles enable scientists to observe undersea life and
geography that other instruments may miss. Some submersibles,
such as the Alvin and Turtle, carry a human crew. Sometimes
submersibles have carried divers deep into the ocean where
they leave the sub to study the ocean bottom or to collect
marine specimens.
The Johnson Sea-Link is equipped with a variety of tools that
scientists use to collect samples from the ocean depths.


58 OCEANOGRAPHY
Technology and the Sea.
Unmanned submersibles can be operated from the
surface ship or from a manned submersible; others
are autonomous and can run independent of human
interaction for weeks at a time once programmed.
These undersea robots go where humans dare not,
into tight crevices or sunken ships, and they have the
advantage of not needing to eat or sleep.
Satellites transmit data from buoys and other instruments at
sea to oceanographers on shore. They also can relay images of
the ocean’s surface, indicating the location of sea ice, pollution,
weather conditions, and, in some cases, ocean currents. For
example, scientists may track satellite images of the Gulf Stream
over the course of weeks to record changes in the current.
Marine Navigation and GPS
For centuries, navigators and explorers have searched the heav-
ens for a system that would enable them to accurately locate
their position on the globe. In 1993, the U.S. Air Force launched
the last of 24 satellites into orbit, completing a network known
as the Global Positioning System, or GPS.
Satellites help oceanographers track changes in such elements as weather patterns,
which affect the world’s oceans.
With a GPS
receiver that
costs less than
a few hundred
dollars, you can
instantly learn
your location—
your latitude,
longitude, and
even altitude—to
within a hundred
feet or less.


OCEANOGRAPHY 59
.Technology and the Sea
Ballard and the Titanic:
Just the Tip of the Iceberg
As a participant in a 1977 expedition that found hydrothermal
vents in the Galapagos Rift, American oceanographer Robert
Ballard helped discover the plant and animal life within these
deep-sea warm springs at the ocean bottom. To advance
deepwater exploration, he designed a series of high-tech
vessels, most notably the Argo-Jason. This small undersea
robot enabled a remote-controlled camera to explore the
ocean depths while transmitting live images to scientists
aboard a ship. Argo-Jason was used to locate the Titanic
and numerous other shipwrecks, including the Lusitania
and Bismarck.
At Woods Hole Oceanographic Institute, Ballard was
involved in more than 65 expeditions. He helped develop
Alvin, a submersible equipped with a mechanical arm,
used to map the Mid-Atlantic Ridge. He departed to Mystic,
Connecticut, in 1997 to lead the Institute for Exploration,
a center for deep-sea archaeology.
This incredible technology was made possible by scientific
and engineering advances, particularly the development of
the world’s most accurate timepieces: atomic clocks, precise
to within a billionth of a second. Today, GPS is saving lives,
helping society in countless other ways, and generating a
multibillion-dollar industry.





OCEANOGRAPHY 61
.Careers Related to the Sea
Careers Related to the Sea
To become an oceanographer, you will need a background in
science and mathematics, and a solid knowledge of at least one
basic science such as biology, chemistry, geology, or physics.
In college, oceanography courses help an undergraduate student
learn how science applies to the study of the ocean. Your educa-
tion should include an undergraduate degree (four years) and
at least a master’s degree (two more years). You may need a
doctorate (three more years).
An oceanographer may choose from several types of careers
after completing training. Colleges and universities provide
teaching and research opportunities. The government employs
oceanographers in areas such as the Department of Commerce
and the Environmental Protection Agency. The private sector
offers the most opportunities. Engineering businesses, oil and
gas extraction companies, and metals mining firms need ocean-
ographers, geologists, and geophysicists.
Oceanographers may detect and track ocean-related
weather events, investigate ocean pollution, look for minerals on
the seafloor, or study the migration of aquatic animals. Marine
engineers design, construct, and repair ships, submarines, and
port facilities. Ocean engineers design and install equipment
used in the ocean, including oil rigs and other offshore installa-
tions, and design breakwater systems to prevent beach erosion.
Plenty of other ocean-related career opportunities exist, including:
• Aquaculture worker
• Coast Guardsman
• Ocean tour or
dive operator
• Commercial
fisherman or diver,
kelp harvester
• Conservationist or
fish and game officer
• Lifeguard
• Longshoreman
• Mariculturist
• Meteorologist
• Offshore oil worker
• Sailor, ship’s captain,
boat operator
• Ship builder
• Underwater
photographer





OCEANOGRAPHY 63
.Oceanography Projects
Oceanography Projects
Collecting Plankton
The plankton nets used in most oceanographic research are
made of silk or nylon cloth that comes in several different grades
and mesh sizes. The holes of this material are very uniform,
so it is ideal for accurate collection. However, any fine-meshed
cloth such as nylon screening, sheer curtain fabric, cheesecloth,
or nylon hose makes a suitable plankton net.
Create the plankton-collection net by
following these steps:
Step 1—Cut the toe out of the nylon
hose and push the container into
the leg.
Materials Needed
To make a simple net
for requirement 7a, you
will need:
■■ One leg from an old pair
of nylon hose
■■ An empty can or plastic
bottle (a 16-ounce can
will work, or a 2-liter
plastic soft drink bottle
with the top cut off)
■■ Several pieces of
medium-weight wire
(strong but flexible
enough to bend)
■■ Large needle
■■ Fishing line (nylon thread)
■■ Scissors
1


64 OCEANOGRAPHY
Oceanography Projects.
Step 2—Tie a knot in the
end of the hose under the
collection container.
Another way to attach the collection
container is to use a screw-type,
adjustable hose clamp. First rein-
force the end of the hose by sewing
canvas or sailcloth to it.
Then use the clamp to
attach the can to the
reinforced net. Be sure to
use a rigid metal can. The
clamp method will not
work well with a flexible
plastic bottle.
Step 3—Bend a piece of wire
into a circle the same size as
the top of the hose.
2
3


OCEANOGRAPHY 65
.Oceanography Projects
Step 4—Fold the top of the hose
over the circle of wire and, using
needle and nylon thread, sew
the top to the wire ring.
Step 5—Attach the wire
ring to the towline by a
three-wire bridle. A swivel
from a hardware store can
be used to help keep the
bridle lines from twisting.
4
5
Tow the net through the water alongside a dock, wade with
it, hold it in a current, or tow it from a rowboat. Continue for
about 20 minutes. When you pull the net out of the water, rinse all
plankton down the sides of the net into the collection container by
pouring water through the outside of the net (not over the top).
After you have concentrated the plankton into the collection
container, release the clamp or untie the knot in the hose and
remove the container. Study the sample under a microscope or
high-power glass. Ask your counselor to help you identify the
three most common types of plankton in the sample. A good
biology textbook will have pictures that may help you identify
your “catch.”


66 OCEANOGRAPHY
Oceanography Projects.
Water Testing
For this project, you are to measure water and air
temperatures and turbidity four times a day on five
consecutive days. As with all scientific experiments,
you must use the same exact procedure each time
you collect data.
Record the information you gather on an
oceanographic log sheet like the one shown here. Make your
log sheet large enough to legibly record your observations.
Cover your log sheet with a piece of plastic to keep it dry.
Take your measurements
at the same spot in the
same location every
day so you can make
accurate comparisons.
Name: Location:
Water Temperature Turbidity Air Cloud Cover Water
Temperature Roughness
Surface Midwater Bottom
Date:
9 a.m. 77° F. 75° F. 71° F. 18 inches 76° F. partly cloudy calm
Noon 80° F. 77° F. 73° F. 7 inches 80° F. partly cloudy slightly choppy
3 p.m. 81° F. 79° F. 74° F. 8 inches 82° F. partly cloudy slightly choppy
6 p.m. 78° F. 78° F. 72° F. 16 inches 75° F. overcast calm
Date:
9 a.m.
Noon
3 p.m.
6 p.m.
Date:
9 a.m.
Noon
3 p.m.
6 p.m.
Date:
9 a.m.
Noon
3 p.m.
6 p.m.
Date:
9 a.m.
Noon
3 p.m.
6 p.m.
Oceanographic Log Sheet


OCEANOGRAPHY 67
.Oceanography Projects
If you do not live near the ocean, you can do this experiment
in a lake or stream. You are to measure the water temperature at
the surface, in midwater, and at the bottom. However, differences
in water temperature and turbidity measurements may not show
up in a stream.
First, find out the depth of the water. Then tie a rock to a
nylon line and drop it in. When the rock touches the bottom,
mark the line with an indelible pen (or pin a clothespin to it)
at the surface. Pull up the rock and measure the depth from
the rock to the mark. Now you can determine where to take
the different water temperature measurements.
Measure the air temperature at the same time you measure
water temperature. Note the cloud cover and the roughness of
the water.
To measure turbidity (the amount of stirred-up sediment
in the water), you will need a Secchi disk, which is used world-
wide to monitor the quality of lake water. The disk is 8 inches
in diameter, and is painted in black and white quadrants. It can
be purchased for about $30 or made from a variety of materials
including acrylic, wood, steel, or even an aluminum pie pan or
white plastic dinner plate.
Materials Needed
To make a Secchi disk, you will
need the following parts:
■■ An 8-inch disk, with a 3/8-inch
hole drilled in center (You can
order a 1/4-inch-thick white
opaque acrylic disk with 3/8-inch
holes already drilled in the center
from a plastic supply house.
The disks have paper mask-
ing on both sides, making it
easier to paint quadrants.)
■■ Masking tape, if you do not
buy the acrylic disk from the
plastic supply house
■■ Flat black enamel
spray paint
■■ Metal weight disk with a 3/8-inch
hole drilled in the center (You
can order 1/4-inch steel cut to
5 by 5 inches, with hole drilled,
from a welding supply house.)
■■ An eyebolt, 3 to 4 inches long
and 5/16-inch diameter
■■ Two 5/16-inch nuts
■■ Two flat washers
■■ One locking washer
■■ Nylon rope to fit through
the eyebolt


68 OCEANOGRAPHY
Oceanography Projects.
Assembling the Secchi Disk
Step 1—Mark the 8-inch disk
into four equal quarters. If you
are using the acrylic disk with
the paper masking, carefully
score the lines marked using
a craft knife. Then peel off two
opposing quadrants. If not
using the premasked disk, use
masking tape to cover up two
opposing quadrants.
Step 2—Spray-paint the
exposed quadrants. (Follow
the manufacturer’s instructions
about how to prep the surface
and how many coats to apply.)
Allow the paint to dry. Peel
off the remaining
masking tape.
Step 3—Thread a
nut and flat washer
on the eyebolt, then
push the eyebolt
through the painted
disk and then through
the metal weight disk.
Thread another flat washer,
then the locking washer, and
the remaining nut to bolt the
metal disk to the painted disk.
Step 4—Tie one end of the
nylon rope to the eyebolt.
1
2
3
4


OCEANOGRAPHY 69
.Oceanography Projects
Secchi Disk Procedure
Step 1—Choose only one method to lower the disk—from a boat or a
dock, or by wading. (Anchor the boat to prevent drifting. Be careful not
to disturb the water, as that will interfere with the reading.)
Step 2—Do not wear sunglasses. Lower the Secchi disk on the sunny
side of the boat or dock. Drop the disk straight down just until it
disappears. Mark the rope at the waterline with a clothespin. Slowly
pull the rope up until the disk reappears. Mark the rope at the
waterline with another clothespin.
Step 3—Determine the midpoint between the clothespins. Measure from
that point to the Secchi disk to find how deep you can see into the water.
Record that information to the nearest inch on your log sheet.
Several factors affect turbidity: algae, zooplankton, motor-
boat activity, and soil erosion. What factors are influencing
your turbidity readings?
When you have completed your log sheet, show the
results on a graph. How does water temperature change with
air temperature?
For this project, you are to measure water and air tem-
peratures and compare them. A real oceanographer’s log sheet,
adapted for this project, is shown earlier in this chapter as a
sample for you to use in making your own records.
Measure the water temperature one foot below the surface
of a body of water four times daily—at 9 a.m., noon, 3 p.m., and
6 p.m.—for six consecutive days. (You can do this in a lake or
stream if you do not live near the ocean, but in most streams,
you will not be able to observe variations in water temperature.
Can you explain how mixing will keep water temperatures fairly
constant near the surface of a stream?)
Measure the air temperature at the same time you measure
water temperature. Note the cloud cover, direction and speed of
the wind, and the roughness of the water.
Chart your findings on a simple bar graph that shows how
the water temperature changes with air temperature.


70 OCEANOGRAPHY
Oceanography Projects.
Wave Testing
A wave generator is a device that is used to produce waves in a
tank or other container of water so studies can be made of wave
action. For this project, you can make a simple one that will not
be expensive or hard to put together. Use a shallow tray or pan
for your water container. It should be deep enough to hold at
least an inch of water.
Materials Needed
To make the generator,
you will need the
following parts:
■■ One sturdy
9-by-13-inch aluminum
baking pan (or
something similar)
■■ One piece of smooth
wood, slightly shorter
than the width of the
pan (A 1 X 1-inch stock
will do; make sure it is
smooth by sanding
if necessary.)
■■ Two brass
screw hooks
■■ Two rubber bands,
at least 4 inches long
before stretching
■■ One length of string,
4 feet long or so
■■ One pinch-type clothespin
■■ One ¼-by-1-inch bolt and 2 nuts to fit it
■■ One miniature DC motor such as is used to drive model boats
(Most hobby and craft shops have these.)
■■ One rheostat to control the speed of the motor, available from hobby
and craft shops, and flashlight batteries or dry cell to operate the motor
■■ A counterweight (such as a bolt or nut) may be necessary


OCEANOGRAPHY 71
.Oceanography Projects
Building the Generator
Step 1—Screw the
hooks into the wood
about 1/2 inch from
the ends to make a
wave bar.
Step 2—Drill a hole in one
handle of the clothespin and
screw it to the side of the bar,
a little off center.
Step 3—Drill a hole in the
bolt about 1/4 inch from the
head, just large enough for
the motor shaft.
Step 4—Screw one nut on
the bolt clear up to the head.
Then insert the motor shaft in
the small hole and tighten the
nut to hold the bolt firmly on
the shaft.
1
2
3
4


72 OCEANOGRAPHY
Oceanography Projects.
Step 5—Put the other nut on the
bolt above the shaft, but do not
tighten it. It is used to adjust
the vibration.
Step 6—Wire the motor to the
battery by way of the rheostat
and clamp it to the bar with
the clothespin. Attach a
counterweight if needed.
Step 7—Position the generator
above the water tray by attach-
ing each end of the string to
one of the rubber bands, so the
bar just touches the water in the
tray and is flat with the water
surface. Keep it steady by hook-
ing the string from above to a
stable object.
Step 8—Start the generator
and adjust the free nut on the
1/4-inch bolt so you can get a
vibration of not more than 1/16
of an inch. Too much vibration
will spoil the wave patterns.
6
8
5
7


OCEANOGRAPHY 73
.Oceanography Projects
Adjust the motor speed to
achieve the desired wave pattern.
If you run the motor too fast, the
waves will be too close together; too
slow will give the opposite effect.
To see the waves and their
effects, shine a bright light on the
water so it will be reflected on a
wall or large white piece of paper.
The best type of light would be a
homemade projector or a spotlight,
if you have one. By placing small
rectangles of glass or plastic in the
opposite end of the pan from the
generator, you can represent a
breakwater, a smooth beach, a jetty,
or a groin. Then you can demon-
strate how waves are reflected
(turned back without bending)
or refracted (bent).
When the waves are unobstructed, you will get a
pattern-like view. Refracted waves will look like
view B. Reflected waves will look like view C.
A
B
C
No obstruction
Refracted waves
Reflected waves


74 OCEANOGRAPHY
Glossary.
Glossary
abyssal plains. Large flat areas on the
ocean floor.
aquaculture. Raising fish or shellfish
under controlled conditions for food.
atoll. A ring-shaped coral reef that
grows from a submerged volcanic peak.
backwash. Water motion seaward
across the foreshore (the portion of the
beach from the mean low tide to the
top of the ridge above the beach).
baleen. Bony material grown in place
of teeth in baleen whales, allowing
them to strain food.
barrier beach. A sand ridge extending
parallel to a shore, from which it is
separated by a lagoon.
barrier island. A broad barrier beach
lying parallel to a shore, separated by
a sound.
barrier reef. A coral reef that parallels
the shore, separated by open water.
beach drift. Movement of material
down the beach.
berm. A ridge above the beach formed
by storm waves.
breakwater. A barrier that protects a
harbor or shore from waves.
chop. Locally generated waves.
cold seeps. Areas where methane-
and sulfide-rich fluids seep from the
ocean floor.


OCEANOGRAPHY 75
.Glossary
colonial corals. Coral animals (polyps)
that group together to form a coral reef.
continental drift. The slow movement of
continents described by plate tectonics.
continental shelf. The part of a conti-
nent that extends underwater.
continental slope. The portion of the
continental shelf that slopes down to
the abyssal plain.
coral. Either the living coral animal
(the polyp) or the skeletal remains of
the animal.
coral reef. Structure formed when
many thousands of coral polyps grow
next to and on top of each other in
large colonies.
current. A steady movement of water
or air in a definite direction.
deep ocean currents. Slow circulation
of water at great depths driven by
density differences.
density. The average mass per unit
volume; a measure of how much matter
is squeezed into a given space.
dulse. An edible red alga that grows on
rocky shores of the Atlantic Ocean.
foreshore. The portion of the beach
from the mean low tide to the top of
the ridge above the beach.
greenhouse gas. Gases in Earth’s
atmosphere that cause the greenhouse
effect, or the trapping of heat in
the atmosphere.
groin. A structure that angles out into
the sea to protect a shoreline.
guyot. Flat-topped seamounts.
holdfast. A structure that attaches
certain seaweeds or other algae to
the sea bottom or rocks.
holoplankton. Animals that spend
their entire life cycle as plankton.
Coral reef


Lagoon
76 OCEANOGRAPHY
Glossary.
hydrothermal vents. Cracks in the
ocean floor from which heated water
continually rises.
jetty. A structure such as a pier that
projects into a body of water to protect
a harbor.
kelp. Various species of large
brown algae.
lagoon. A shallow body of water,
especially one separated from the sea
by sandbars or reefs.
limpets. Mollusks having a cone-shaped
shell and sticking to rocks of tidal areas.
lithosphere. Earth’s outermost shell.
littoral drift. The combined movement
of sediment via longshore drift and
beach drift.
longshore current. An offshore current
slowing along the shore.
longshore drift. The movement of
sediment offshore.
low-tide terrace. The portion of the
beach that flattens out where the
waves break.
mariculture. Cultivation of marine
organisms in their natural habitats,
usually for commercial purposes.
meroplankton. Organisms that spend
the larval or egg stages as plankton.
mid-oceanic ridges. Underwater moun-
tain ranges generally running north and
south in the center of the oceans.
mollusk. Marine invertebrate typically
having a protective shell and a soft body.
nodule. Lump of minerals on the
ocean bottom.
ocean density. The weight of water
divided by the amount of space
it occupies.
ocean mixing. Seawater carrying
dissolved gases and important nutrients
mixing with nutrient-poor seawater.
oceanic fracture zone. Long straight
ridges and troughs that run perpendicular
to the mid-oceanic ridges.
oceanic trench. A long narrow depres-
sion of the seabed with relatively
steep sides.
photosynthesis. The process by which
green plants, algae, and some other
organisms convert the sun’s energy
into a form of energy that they can
use or store.
phytoplankton. Tiny free-floating
aquatic plants.
plate tectonics. Earth’s outermost
shell—the lithosphere—is formed of
these rigid plates that, over time, slowly
move across its surface (as well as under
the ocean and under continents) and
float on a bed of partly molten rock.


OCEANOGRAPHY 77
.Glossary
rip current. A current running back
out to sea.
salinity. A measure of the amount of
dissolved salts in ocean water.
sandbar. Submerged or partly exposed
humps of sand or coarse sediment built
by waves offshore from a beach. Also
called an offshore bar.
sea anemone. Flowerlike marine
animal with tentacles surrounding a
central mouth.
seafloor spreading. The process of
forming new oceanic crust by volcanic
material pushing through cracks in the
oceanic ridges.
seamount. Large undersea mountain
with a submerged peak.
sound. A passage of water between the
mainland and an island.
splash zone. In the intertidal zone,
the area highest above the waves.
storm surge. Storm-pushed seawater,
which may combine with normal tides.
submarine canyon. V-shaped
valley cut into the hard rock of the
continental slope.
swash. The upward movement of
water onto the beach.
swell. Long, far-apart waves in the
open ocean.
thermohaline circulation. Vertical
movements of ocean water masses
caused by density differences that
are due to variations in temperature
and salinity.
tidal bore. Wave or wall of water that
races up an inlet as the tide comes in.
tsunami. A long-period gravity wave
generated by a submarine earthquake
or volcanic event.
turbidity currents. Currents heavy
with sediment that flow down the
continental slope.
upper intertidal zone. The tidal
zone below the splash zone.
upwelling. A current of cold,
nutrient-rich water rising to the
surface. Many marine plants and
animals live off this water.
vertical migration. The movement
at night of some zooplankton to
the surface.
westerly. A trade wind that blows
surface waters toward the east.
zooplankton. Planktonic animals.
zooxanthellae. A form of algae that
lives in corals and other animals and
provides food through photosynthesis.


78 OCEANOGRAPHY
Oceanography Resources.
Scouting Resources
Bird Study, Energy, Environmental
Science, Fish and Wildlife Management,
Fishing, Fly-Fishing, Geology, Mammal
Study, Nature, Plant Science, Reptile
and Amphibian Study, Soil and Water
Conservation, Sustainability, and
Weather merit badge pamphlets
Books
Ballard, Robert D. Exploring the Titanic.
Econo-Clad Books, 1990.
Broad, William J. The Universe Below:
Discovering the Secrets of the Deep
Sea. Simon and Schuster, 1997.
Carson, Rachel L. The Sea Around Us.
Oxford University Press, 1991.
Carson, Rachel L., and Sue Hubbell.
The Edge of the Sea. Houghton
Mifflin, 1998.
Center for Marine Conservation Staff.
The Ocean Book: Aquarium and
Seaside Activities and Ideas for All
Ages. John Wiley & Sons Inc., 1989.
Coulombe, Deborah. The Seaside
Naturalist: A Guide to Study at the
Seashore. Simon and Schuster, 1992.
Denny, Mark. How the Ocean Works:
An Introduction to Oceanography.
Princeton University Press, 2008.
Earle, Sylvia, and Linda K. Glover.
Ocean: An Illustrated Atlas. National
Geographic, 2008.
Earle, Sylvia A., and Wolcott Henry.
Wild Ocean: America’s Parks
Under the Sea. National Geographic
Society, 1999.
Ellis, Richard. Encyclopedia of the Sea.
Alfred A. Knopf, 2000.
Foreman, W. History of American Deep
Submersible Operations.
Best Publishing Co., 1999.
Miller, James W., and Ian G. Koblick.
Living and Working in the Sea.
Best Publishing Co., 1995.
Strang, Craig, Catharine Halversen, and
Kimi Hosoume. On Sandy Shores.
GEMS: Great Explorations in Math
and Science, 1996.
Oceanography Resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


OCEANOGRAPHY 79
.Oceanography Resources
Organizations and Websites
American Meteorological Society
Telephone: 617-227-2425
www.ametsoc.org
Careers in Oceanography, Ocean
Engineering, and Marine Biology
www.marinecareers.net
The JASON Project
Telephone: 703-726-4232
www.jason.org
National Centers for
Environmental Information
Telephone: 301-713-3277
www.ncei.noaa.gov
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration
Telephone: 202-482-6090
www.noaa.gov
The Ocean Alliance
Toll-free telephone: 800-969-4253
www.whale.org
Scripps Institute of Oceanography
Telephone: 858-534-3624
scripps.ucsd.edu
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Thomas
Potts, associate director at the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration’s Undersea Research
Center, University of North Carolina
Wilmington, for his extensive
assistance with this revision of the
Oceanography merit badge pamphlet.
Scouting America is also grateful
to Eagle Scout Lawrence Cahoon,
professor, Department of Biology and
Marine Biology at the University of
North Carolina Wilmington, for his
assistance. Scouting America would
additionally like to acknowledge and
thank Brandis Hartsell, former life
science specialist at Roper Mountain
Science Center, and Tim Taylor, life
science specialist at Roper Mountain
Science Center, for their review of this
pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Life on the Edge 2004 Expedition: NOAA
Office of Exploration, courtesy—page
57 (Johnson Sea-Link)
NOAA, courtesy—page 57
(Okeanos Explorer)
OAR/National Undersea Research
Program (photo by C. Van Dover),
College of William & Mary, courtesy
—page 53
OAR/National Undersea Research
Program; Farleigh Dickinson
University, courtesy—page 55


Oceanography Resources.
OAR/National Undersea Research
Program; University of Connecticut,
courtesy—page 56
OAR/National Undersea Research
Program; Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institute, courtesy—page 54
Pacific Ring of Fire 2004 Expedition:
NOAA Office of Exploration; Dr. Bob
Embley, NOAA PMEL, Chief Scientist,
courtesy—page 60 (ship workers)
Wikipedia.org/David Rydevik, courtesy
—page 18
Wikipedia.org/Malene Thyssen
—page 48 (porpoise)
Wikipedia.org/Whit Welles—page 47
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Tim Brox—page 49
Daniel Giles—pages 15, 39 (estuary, bed
of seaweed), 60 (oceanographer on
platform; lab worker), and 70–73 (all
wave generator photos)
John McDearmon—all illustrations
on pages 8, 10, 12–14, 17, 20–22,
40–41, 51, 52 (gulper), 58, and 73
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!