ORIENTEERINGDIRECTION-OF-TRAVEL
ARROW
LINE UP THE MAGNETIC ARROW
AND ORIENTING ARROW.
READ
BEARING.
STEM-Based


ORIENTEERING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Orienteering or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
35925
ISBN 978-0-8395-3385-6
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024b Printing FPO


Note to the Counselor: While orienteering is primarily an individual sport,
Scouting America Youth Protection procedures call for using the buddy
system. Requirement 7(a) can be completed by pairs or groups of Scouts.
ORIENTEERING 3


Contents
What Is Orienteering? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Using a Compass . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Using a Topographic Map . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Using a Map and Compass Together. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Judging Distance on the Ground . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Competitive Orienteering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Orienteering Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 38
Setting Up a Competition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Orienteering First Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Orienteering Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 74


What Is Orienteering?
Since ancient times, rough maps of Earth and simple
compasses have guided explorers, scouts, and pioneers like
Lewis and Clark, Marco Polo, Christopher Columbus, and
Amelia Earhart. Often, their skills with map and compass
were all that kept these men and women from disaster.
What has been a vital skill for humans for thousands of
years is now a sport—orienteering. In 1919, a Swedish Scout
leader, Major Ernst Killander, decided that compasses and maps
could be used for fun as well as survival and navigation. Sport
orienteering was born on that day, as 155 contestants fanned
out around Stockholm with compasses and maps.
The sport’s popularity has grown steadily. The International
Orienteering Federation was formed in 1961, and Orienteering
USA followed in 1971. The International Orienteering Federation
has organized the annual Orienteering World Cup since 2004.
This series of orienteering competitions includes up to 13 events.
Thousands of people participate in the sport each year in local
clubs and competitions. There are more than 70 clubs in the
United States alone.
Scouting America has
long included
orienteering in its
program. The
Orienteering
merit badge is your
invitation to explore
this exciting activity.
By definition,
orienteering is
a cross-country
race in which
participants use
a highly detailed
map and a
compass to
navigate their
way between
checkpoints
along an
unfamiliar course.
Orienteering is not pacing back-and-forth between markers
in camp. It's much more challenging—and fun—than that.
ORIENTEERING 5
.What Is Orienteering?





Using a Compass
Earth is a giant magnet with two ends, a north magnetic pole
and a south magnetic pole. The poles are areas where the lines
of magnetic force come together and are strongest. Even at
distances of thousands of miles, the poles exert a pull on
magnetized minerals. The Chinese were probably the first to
discover this between 4,000 and 5,000 years ago when they
noticed that lodestone or magnetite, if allowed to swing freely,
would always point in a north-south direction. By carving a
small pointer of this min-
eral and then floating it
on a liquid, they invented
the first compass. Once
they added a compass
card, showing the major
directions, they could
follow those directions
relative to the Earth’s
magnetic field.
Today’s compass has
not changed much from
those early models. Basic
compasses combine a
compass card showing
16 or 32 points of the
compass or 360 degrees
of a circle, and a magne-
tized metal needle that is
colored on the north end.
ORIENTEERING 7
.Using a Compass


The compass rose
has appeared on
maps since the
14th century.
A Portuguese
mapmaker
drew the first
32-point compass
rose with a
fleur-de-lis—
familiar to
all Scouts—
indicating north
and a cross
indicating east
toward the
Holy Land.
Types of Orienteering Compasses
Orienteering compasses fall into two categories: thumb
compasses and baseplate or protractor compasses.
Special Features of Orienteering Compasses
The bearing index and direction-of-travel arrow are located on
the baseplate. Degrees on a rotating 360-degree bezel are read
against the index line. The direction-of-travel arrow, found at
the far end of the index line, indicates which way to go after
you have taken a bearing.
Map scales, such as the 1:15,000 scale commonly found
on orienteering maps or the 1:24,000 and 1:62,500 scales
found on U.S. Geological Survey topographic maps, may be
marked along the edges of the compass’s baseplate. Inch and
millimeter scales may appear as well. These scales simplify
measuring distance on a map.
The baseplate compass, a magnetic
needle within a 360-degree bezel that
rotates on a clear plastic base (allowing
maps to be read beneath it), provides a
convenient and accurate platform for
working with bearings.
The thumb compass
rides on the thumb and
simplifies map orientation
and direction finding while
you are on the move. It
suffers a bit in accuracy,
however, especially in the
hands of a novice.
BASEPLATE
COMPASS
MAGNETIC
NEEDLE
BEZEL
ORIENTING
LINES
ORIENTING
ARROW
BEARING INDEX
DIRECTION-OF-TRAVEL
ARROW
MAGNIFYING GLASS
INDEX LINE
SCALES
8 ORIENTEERING
Using a Compass.


An orienting arrow is embossed on the transparent base
of the circular compass housing. You use the orienting arrow
by aligning it with the needle so that you can take a bearing
or establish your direction of travel when a bearing is known.
When used along with a map, it allows you to orient the map
and take a bearing from the map.
North-south or orienting lines lie parallel to the orienting
arrow on the base of the compass housing. You use these
lines when taking a bearing from a map and when identifying
landmarks using a compass and a map.
The magnetic
needle of an
orienteering
compass is
fast setting so
that the orienteer
wastes no time
waiting for the
needle to come
to rest.
Taking a Bearing
Taking a bearing is simply measuring a direction
from one point on the ground to another. Hold the
compass in one hand, centered on your body. Rotate
your body and the compass until the direction-of-
travel arrow points in the direction you want to go.
Rotate the bezel of the compass until the north end
of the orienting arrow lines up with the north end
of the magnetic arrow (usually red). Determine the
bearing by reading the number on the bezel directly
opposite the bearing index.
The bearing to the landmark in this example is 225 degrees.
DIRECTION-OF-TRAVEL
ARROW
LINE UP THE MAGNETIC ARROW
AND ORIENTING ARROW.
READ
BEARING.
ORIENTEERING 9
.Using a Compass





Using a
Topographic Map
A map is a two-dimensional representation of a three-dimen-
sional space. It strives to reproduce on a sheet of paper, by
using symbols, all the features of a piece of land or water.
If you walk all the way around the base of a mountain
and always stay at the exact same elevation, you are contouring
around it. The line you follow is called a contour line. Now do
it again, only walk a line 20 feet higher in elevation. You have
walked a second contour line. The contour interval between
the two lines is 20 feet.
The contour interval varies from map to map. The contour
interval for most USGS maps is 20 or 40 feet, while for most
orienteering maps it is 3 or 5 meters. The amount of the interval
is usually shown on the map. Find the contour interval on the
lower right-hand corner of the full-color centerfold map of Sid
Richardson Scout Ranch in this pamphlet.
You also can figure out the contour interval. Here’s how.
Determine the number of contour lines between the two adjacent
index contours; add 1 to this figure, then divide by the elevation
difference. Usually, an index contour occurs every fifth line. It
is a bolder brown than the other contour lines, and on most
A topographic
map tries to show
the form of the
land including
relief, or elevation,
by the use of
contour lines.
To understand how relief can be represented by a
flat map, imagine a hilly island in the middle of a
lake. The shoreline is its lowest contour line. If the
water rises 20 feet in the lake, the shoreline will be
higher up the hill. If you were to draw these two
lines on a sheet of paper, the upper line would
lie inside the lower one. Each rise in water level
will result in a line that you could draw inside the
preceding one. These rings represent a topographic
or contour map of the hill.
ORIENTEERING 11
.Using a Topographic Map


maps you will find a number on it that tells its elevation above
sea level. On orienteering maps, the index contour line does not
have an elevation number, but is thicker than the others and is
used as a guide for the eye.
You can also “see” the shape of the terrain from the profile
of the lines on the paper. If a mountain is perfectly conical
like a wizard’s hat, the contour lines depicting the mountain
will look like a bull’s-eye. Each contour line will be perfectly
circular, and all will be the same distance apart. More likely,
however, the mountain is irregular. At one part of the mountain,
the contour line may intersect a valley or a depression. If the
contour line ran into the valley, it would lose elevation and
would no longer be considered the same contour line. In order
to continue indicating the same elevation on the mountain, the
line goes up slightly and then drops back down at the other
side of the valley, creating an upward-pointing V shape. When
a higher point like a ridge is encountered, the contour line will
“V” downward.
GENTLE SLOPE
STEEP SLOPE
CLIFFS
MOUNTAIN SUMMIT
VALLEY OR GULLY
RIDGE
The illustrations here show some important elements.
If two contour lines are far apart, it would take a
long horizontal distance to climb that distance on
the map—the land is relatively flat at that point or
just a gentle slope. If they are close together (steep),
or almost touching (a cliff), getting up the next few
feet will be hard!
Upward “V’s” on topographic maps point toward higher
elevations; downward “V’s” point toward lower elevations.
VALLEY RIDGE
12 ORIENTEERING
Using a Topographic Map.


Map Features
Most maps include a scale relating distance on the map to dis-
tances on the actual terrain, and symbols representing features
on the ground. The scale is represented as a ratio. Common
scales on orienteering maps are 1:5,000, 1:7,500, 1:10,000, and
1:15,000, while scales of 1:24,000, 1:62,500, and 1:250,000
are used for other types of maps. The fraction means that one
unit of measurement on the map is equal to a certain number
of like units on the actual terrain. So on a map with a scale
of 1:24,000, 1 inch on the map equals 24,000 inches on the
ground, or 2,000 feet. On a map with a 1:62,500 scale, 1 inch
equals 62,500 inches, or approximately 1 mile. Remember that
the 1:10000 map ratio is scaled to meters, with 1 centimeter on
the map equal to 100 meters on the ground—a little longer than
a football field.
Accompanying the fractional scale of the map are distance
rulers—visual representations of the map’s scale. Three rulers
are common: one in miles, one in thousands of feet, and for
orienteering maps, one in meters and kilometers. These are
used to convert a distance between two places on the map to
a distance between the same two places on the ground.
Find the scale and the distance ruler on the Sid Richardson
Scout Ranch map in this pamphlet.
Maps are graphic representations of reality. All land features
on maps are represented by symbols, which may represent
the same features from map to map. But symbols can vary,
depending on the mapmaker’s preference, the map’s intended
purpose, and the country of origin. Therefore, a map usually
will have a legend to help identify the symbols. For example,
the legend of the Sid Richardson Scout Ranch map shows
symbols defined for terrain features such as earthbanks, cliffs,
boulders, lakes, power lines, and buildings.
The smaller the second number in the ratio, the
smaller the area covered, and the more detail the
map will show.
ORIENTEERING 13
.Using a Topographic Map


Colors on Maps
Color is used to further define map symbols. Orienteering
maps are five-color maps, using black, brown, blue, green, and
yellow printed on white. The descriptions below apply only to
orienteering maps. Refer to the legends of other maps for
identification of symbols and colors.
14 ORIENTEERING
Using a Topographic Map.


Black: Anything constructed by people, including roads, trails,
houses, buildings, railroads, power lines, dams, bridges, and
boundaries. Paved roads and improved gravel roads are solid
black lines. Unimproved roads (jeep trails) are represented by
broken black lines. Trails are thinner broken lines. Solid black
squares, rectangles, and varying shapes represent buildings.
Ruins are outlined. Rock features also will be shown in black.
Brown: Natural land features, such as earthbanks, gullies,
depressions, dry ditches, pits, and knolls. Contour lines and
form lines also are shown in brown.
Blue: Water features, including streams, rivers, ponds, lakes,
oceans, springs, and swamps. Larger patches are ponds or
lakes. A thin blue band is a stream, and a broader band is a
river. A broken blue line means that a stream flows only some
of the time. Swamps and marshes are shown with hatched
blue lines.
Green: Vegetation. The shade of green may vary depending on
the density of the ground cover under the trees: The darker the
shade of green, the denser the ground vegetation. Dark green
may reflect nearly impenetrable vegetation, and medium and
light green shading could indicate vegetation that you could
walk or slowly run through.
Yellow: Open terrain, where you can easily see the sun by
looking up. Dark yellow is grass that is fairly short, lighter
yellow is rough open terrain, and white dots on yellow is
semiopen terrain with scattered trees and bushes throughout.
White: Open forest canopy with minimal ground vegetation.
You can run fast through this terrain.
Red or purple: Indicates the layout of the orienteering course.
The International
Orienteering
Federation has
adopted standard
symbols to
be used for
orienteering maps,
and these are
used in the United
States as well as
the rest
of the world.
Two factors are important when considering artificial features. First,
they come and go. Don’t depend on human-made features such as
roads and buildings to find your way because they are the most likely
to change with time. Many maps provide the date of compilation or
revision. More recent maps are more likely to truly represent what is
present. Second, artificial features may be represented on the map
larger than they actually would be on the ground. Therefore, when
measuring from a symbol that is exaggerated in size on a map,
measure from the center of the symbol for the greatest accuracy.
ORIENTEERING 15
.Using a Topographic Map


Using a Map and
Compass Together
In orienteering, you use the map and compass together as
a unit, but the map is most important. You can navigate the
course without a compass but not without a map.
Declination
The maps you are most likely to use on Scouting hikes or
backpacking trips are drawn with their tops aimed at true
north. Extend a map’s boundaries far enough upward, and
those lines will reach the north pole. You could say that these
maps are made to speak the language of true north. However,
compass needles do not point to true north. They are pulled
toward magnetic north, an area in Canada more than a thou-
sand miles away from the north pole. Compasses “speak”
magnetic north, which is a different
language from what most maps use.
Arrows drawn in the bottom margin
of many maps show the difference
between true north and magnetic north.
The true-north arrow points toward
the north pole. The magnetic north
arrow points toward magnetic north.
The difference between true north and
magnetic north, measured in degrees, is
called declination. Because of declina-
tion, the compass needle will lie to the
east or west of true north by as much as
20 degrees westerly in Maine and more
than 30 degrees easterly in Alaska. Only
in a thin strip from Lake Superior to
Florida is there zero declination.
Declination in a
particular area
may change over
time, so verify that
you are using a
current map by
checking the date
it was published.
16 ORIENTEERING
Using a Map and Compass Together.


If you do not compensate for declination, you will
not be able to find the actual direction between
two points as related to the north and south of the
landscape. The simplest solution is to convert the
language of the map into the language of the
compass. Do this by drawing magnetic north-south
lines on the map by lining up a ruler against the
magnetic north arrow and extending this line with
a pencil to the top of the map. Draw parallel lines to
this one, a ruler’s width apart. This has already been
done on all orienteering maps. Because they are
drawn with tops aimed at magnetic north, compass
readings can be obtained from or applied directly
to these maps.
The map shown here is marked
with lines along which compasses
will show the same declination.
Magnetic Declination Map of the Continental United States
The difference
between true
north and
magnetic
north is called
declination.
TRUE NORTH
MAGNETIC NORTH
14 DEGREES
ORIENTEERING 17
.Using a Map and Compass Together


You can take a bearing from a map with magnetic north-
south lines drawn on it by aligning the edge of the compass
baseplate along the route of travel, making sure that the
direction-of-travel arrow is pointing in the direction you intend
to go. Rotate the bezel until the orienting arrow or north-south
lines lie parallel to and in the same direction as the magnetic
north-south lines on the map. Read the bearing directly
opposite of the bearing index.
If the magnetic north-south lines are not drawn on the
map, convert the language of the compass to that of the map.
When you take a bearing from the map or apply it to the map,
you must add or subtract the declination to the compass reading
depending on whether the declination is easterly or westerly.
Always add the number of degrees of error for west declination
and subtract for east declination.
On the Sid Richardson Scout Ranch map, the compass edge is laid alongside the line
from the hunter’s stand at “A” and the northwest end of the cliff at “B.” The bezel is
turned until the north-south lines within the ring line up with the north arrow of the
compass. Read the bearing from the index. The bearing is 244 degrees from “A” to “B.”
(Points “A” and “B” can be seen in the top photo on page 21.)
18 ORIENTEERING
Using a Map and Compass Together.


Orienting a Map With a Compass
Orienting a map means aligning it with the terrain. You can
do this visually, but it is easier to make errors that way. A
more accurate way of aligning the map and terrain is to use a
compass. First, rotate the compass bezel until N or 360 degrees
is lined up with the direction-of-travel arrow. Next, set the
compass down on the map, with the compass edge along one
of the north-south magnetic lines and the direction-of-travel
arrow pointing north. Rotate the map and the compass togeth-
er until the compass needle matches the direction-of-travel
arrow. The map is now oriented.
A quick field method of orienting the map is to
hold the compass on the map and turn the map
and compass so that the compass needle parallels
or lines up with the north-south magnetic lines,
with the north end of the needle toward the top of
the map. Check the terrain around you to ensure
that it matches what you see on the map. You can
do this almost constantly while on a course and
even when moving.
ORIENTEERING 19
.Using a Map and Compass Together


Measuring Distance on a Map
You can measure distance on a map by using a compass scale,
a ruled compass edge, or any straight edge.
Using a Compass
Depending on the type of compass, a variety of scales may be
marked along the edge of the baseplate. Ideally, one scale on
the compass is the same as that on your map.
For example, if your map has a scale of 1:24,000
and your compass has that scale on its baseplate,
measuring distance is simple. Take the edge of
the compass with the proper scale on it and con-
nect the points for which the distance is desired.
Simply read the distance directly from the scale.
It is fairly common to find orienteering compasses
with scales of 1:15,000, 1:24,000, or 1:62,500.
Sometimes you might want to use the edge
of the compass as a ruler, with inches on one
side and millimeters on the other side of the
baseplate. Measure the distance on the map with
either scale and compare those distances with
the distance rulers on the margin of the map.
Read off the ground distance. Distance rulers on
maps are generally in miles, kilometers, and feet.
Orienteering uses metric measurements, so you usually will
use the kilometer/meter distance bar on the map.
Identifying Landmarks
With a compass and a map, you can identify a landmark that you can
see from the ground if you know where you are on the map. Take a
bearing to the object. Set the compass on the map with one edge of the
baseplate touching your location. Point the N end of the housing toward
the top of the map. Pivot the entire compass around your location until
either the north-south lines in the compass housing or the orienting
arrow parallels the north-south magnetic lines of the map. Extend a
line from your location up into the map using the baseplate edge of the
compass as a guide. Somewhere along that line is the landmark you
wish to identify. Compare map, bearing, and actual terrain to locate and
identify the feature in question.
On a 1:15,000 scale,
1 inch on a map is
approximately 1,300
feet or 1/4 mile on the
ground; on a 1:24,000
scale, 1 inch on a map
is equal to 2,000 feet
on the ground; and
on a map with a scale
of 1:63,360, 1 inch on
the map is equal to
5,280 feet or about
1 mile on the ground.
20 ORIENTEERING
Using a Map and Compass Together.


Using a Straight Edge
You can easily calculate distances using a strip of paper or
other straight edge. This works well on routes with several legs
and routes that are not straight.
To measure the straight-line
distance between the hunter’s
stand (A) and the northwest
end of the cliff (B) on the Sid
Richardson Scout Ranch map,
place the straight edge along
the line from “A” to “B.”
Make a mark on the edge of
the paper at “A” and one at
“B.” Move the straight edge
to the distance ruler on the
map and measure the distance
between the two marks. The
distance is 585 meters.
To figure a crooked-line distance between “C” and “D,” lay a slip of paper on
the map as in the illustration. Make a tick mark on the paper at “C” and at each
bend in the route until you reach “D.” You can determine the total distance by
laying the piece of paper against the distance ruler and reading the result. The
crooked-line distance in this example is 288 meters.
ORIENTEERING 21
.Using a Map and Compass Together





Judging Distance
on the Ground
For some people, judging distance is the hardest part of
orienteering. But you can make it easier with some preparation.
One way of judging distance is by pace-counting or counting
every time your right (or left) foot touches the ground over
a given distance. Another method is to calculate the time it
takes you to cover a predetermined distance. A standard length
course for taking these measurements is 100 meters.
Setting Up a 100-Meter
Pace-Measuring Course
Lay out a 100-meter course in a straight line using a tape
measure. Clearly mark the beginning and the end of the course.
It is best to lay out the course where terrain and vegetation
are about the same throughout the entire course. This will help
you determine more accurately your pace per 100 meters for
a given type of terrain or vegetation.
If you will be moving through a variety of terrain and
vegetation while orienteering, it is best to determine a
100-meter pace for each type of area in which you will travel.
This could mean setting up several 100-meter pace courses.
When choosing an area to set up courses, look for places
that have a number of 100-meter-long blocks with differing
conditions. This will save time in the process of learning your
pace count.
If the terrain is
too mixed, the
value you get
for the pace
count will be less
accurate for any
single condition.
Tip: Remember, you are growing rapidly in this
stage of your life. Your pace will change as you
grow and start taking longer strides. Remeasure
your pace frequently.
ORIENTEERING 23
.Judging Distance on the Ground


Walking Pace/Time
Once you have laid out the course, start at the beginning
and walk the length of it, counting the number of paces and
recording the time it takes you to reach the end. This is your
walking pace and time per 100 meters. You will get a more
accurate measure if you walk the course two or more times
and then divide the total paces and minutes by the total
meters walked. This is particularly important if the course
is on uneven ground.
Every time
orienteers switch
from walking to
running or the
reverse, they must
mentally adjust
the pace and time
as well.
24 ORIENTEERING
Judging Distance on the Ground.


Running Pace/Time
Foot speed is important in orienteering, especially for competitive
orienteering. As your stride lengthens, the distance you cover
increases. So the number of paces per 100 meters will decrease,
as will the time it takes you to cover that distance.
Measuring your running pace and time is exactly the same
as measuring your walking pace. Because this is much more
active, it is even more important that you run the course several
times to get a true measure.
Uphill and Downhill Pace/Time
Your stride will shorten as you move uphill, so the number of
paces and the time to cover 100 meters will be more than on
level terrain.
You can get downhill measurements on the same course
you use for the uphill by traveling in the opposite direction.
Gravity wants to pull the downhill walker or runner along at a
faster clip. Your stride will lengthen and the number of paces
and time per 100 meters will decrease.
Vegetation Pace/Time
The runnability of vegetation can vary from impenetrable
(called fight by orienteers), walkable, slowly runnable, and
runnable. These conditions may be indicated on maps made
especially for orienteering
(see the legend of the Sid
Richardson Scout Ranch
map). Other maps indicate
only that vegetation is
present, so each meter
you traverse can be a
surprise—sometimes
pleasant, sometimes not.
However, you probably
will have a general idea
what the vegetation will
be like in your area.
You can make
more accurate
pace estimates by
calculating paces
and times on
several 100-meter
courses through
typical vegetation
for your area.
ORIENTEERING 25
.Judging Distance on the Ground


Some orienteering meets use electronic punching to record competitors’ times.


Competitive Orienteering
There are two major forms of orienteering competition: score
orienteering and cross-country orienteering (also called free or
point-to-point orienteering). There are a number of variations
of each type.
Score Orienteering
In score orienteering competitions, many controls, or check-
points, are placed in an area of 1 to 2 kilometers around the
starting point, which is also the finish line. The number of
controls may vary. Each one can have a point value. Controls
that are farthest from the start or hardest to find are awarded
a high point value; those near the start and easy to find get
lower values.
Competitors have a set time to find as many controls
as they can and earn as large a point total as possible. They
may visit the controls in any order they wish. The course is
designed so that they cannot possibly find all the controls in
the time allowed. A penalty of 1 point is subtracted from a
competitor’s total for every 10 seconds the competitor is
overdue at the finish. In team events, this penalty can be
changed to 5 points for every minute late. The highest
score wins.
In score orienteering, there is no reward for arriving
at the finish ahead of time. Competitors must judge
the time well and know their own ability at running
and map reading in relation to time and distance.
This is the best way to introduce orienteering to
a group of beginners because it is an equal test
for the strong runner and map reader and for
the novice.
ORIENTEERING 27
.Competitive Orienteering


Team Competition
Score orienteering can be run as a team competition. Each
team is given marked maps and a score sheet that describes
all the controls and shows their point values. The team captain
notes the length of time that the team has to complete the
course. The team captain then assigns controls to each mem-
ber of the team, giving the harder ones to the best members
of the team and the easier ones to the weakest members. He
or she may send team members off in pairs. The competitors
find the controls assigned to them, note the code letter on each
control, and report back to their leader. The team cannot hand
in its score sheet with the code letters written in until all
members of the team have returned.
Another way to run this event is to have only the best
scores for each team count toward the team total. This number
is at the discretion of event organizers. Each member starts at
a different time so that he or she cannot help anyone else. The
team’s score is the total of the best individual scores.
Cross-Country Orienteering
In cross-country orienteering, every competitor must visit the
same controls in numerical order, and as quickly as possible.
This form of orienteering is a challenge in route choice and
stamina. Controls, usually eight to 24, will be marked on
competitors’ maps with numbered circles. All features where
controls are placed will be clearly described on a control
description sheet that each competitor gets along with the
map. Each control will have a unique code letter or number.
Team competition
is an ideal
competition for
Scouts when
they become good
at orienteering.
Prizes can be
awarded for the
best individual
competitor and
the best team.
Variations on Score Orienteering
In night orienteering, competitors use lights on
the course, and the controls often are marked with
reflective tape. In ski orienteering, skis and ski trails
are used. There is a well-established international
competition in ski orienteering. ROGAINE (Rugged
Outdoor Group Activity Involving Navigation and
Endurance) events last a long time—6, 12, 24, or
48 hours. Generally, competitors must work with a
partner or group. These variations also can be used
for cross-country orienteering.
28 ORIENTEERING
Competitive Orienteering.


CONTROL MAP FOR YELLOW
(ADVANCED BEGINNER) LEVEL COURSE
Study the cross-country course shown here. The descriptive clues on
the control description sheet for this contest would look like this:
1. Road bend
2. Building northeast
outside corner
3. Trail junction stream
4. Special artificial feature
5. Trail junction pipeline
6. Pipeline crossing stream
7. Northeastern boulder cluster
8. Building southwest
outside corner
43
2
1
8 7
6 5
ORIENTEERING 29
.Competitive Orienteering


Cross-country courses are age- and skill-graded and can
vary in length. A junior or beginner’s course may be only
1.5 kilometers long, while a championship course can be up
to 14 kilometers. Course levels, indicated by color, progress
from novice to expert: white (beginner), yellow (advanced
beginner), orange (intermediate), and brown, green, red, and
blue (advanced). Long-course orienteering courses are up to
twice as long as the standard course of the same level. The
winner in each age and course level is the fastest competitor
who has all the correct control punches.
Line Orienteering
Line orienteering is organized like the cross-country event,
with one major difference: No controls are marked on the
master map, only a route. The route sometimes follows trails.
At other times it goes through woods on a direct bearing.
Eventually it returns to the starting location.
Competitors must copy this route exactly on their own
maps and follow it as fast as possible by accurate map read-
ing. If they are accurate, they will find controls along the route.
There is a time penalty of 10 to 15 minutes for each missed
control. The fastest person around the course with the highest
number of controls found wins.
Relay Orienteering
Relay orienteering is the most popular team competition.
All the rules for cross-country orienteering apply to relay
orienteering with one addition: A competitor runs only one
loop. The number of loops in the relay depends on the
number of members on a team.
The first team member runs to the master map and
finds only the controls of their own loop marked on the map.
The first runner will be given a baton—an identity disk on a
cord to hang around the neck. Sometimes the map or the
control card is the baton. The runner hands it to the next
runner on the team once the loop is completed. The next
member of the team then does their loop and so forth until all
members have finished their loops and the team has
completed the course.
In line
orienteering,
competitors
start at different
times so that
they can’t follow
in another’s
footsteps.
30 ORIENTEERING
Competitive Orienteering.


1 2
3
Relay orienteering course for three-person team
ORIENTEERING 31
.Competitive Orienteering


Route Orienteering
In route orienteering, a course is marked on the ground with
colored streamers so that it is simple to move from one
streamer to the next. The course may meander through woods
and across fields until it eventually finishes where it started.
At varying distances along the course, yellow flags are placed
beside reasonably obvious features. There also is a series of
blue flags. Each blue flag is beside a sighting stick with a fore
site and a rear site at objects such as a house, a windmill, or
a corner of a wood no farther than 1,500 meters away. An
official waits at each flag.
Competitors are given some pins and a map stapled to
cardboard. The only thing marked on the map is the location
of the start. The start times of the competitors are noted, and
competitors are sent down the course.
Competitors must count their paces and check their loca-
tion the entire time they are on the course. When they see a
yellow flag, they make a pinprick on their maps at the exact
location of the yellow flag. The pricks must be accurate; the
official checks the pin mark and gives a two-minute penalty for
every millimeter the pinprick is off. When competitors reach a
blue flag, they make a pinprick on their maps for the object at
which the sighting stick is pointing. Competitors must know
their own location to correctly pinpoint the object’s location.
Again, a two-minute penalty for each millimeter of error is
added to the total time around the course. The course may be
2 to 4 kilometers long with eight yellow and three blue flags.
Window and Corridor Orienteering
In corridor orienteering, a variation of point-to-point orienteer-
ing, competitors are given a map with only a narrow strip of
terrain visible. If only the control points are visible, it is called
window orienteering. These types of competition place a pre-
mium on compass skills and the ability to figure out the terrain
without seeing the “big picture.”
Participants in
orienteering
events carry a
control card,
which they
punch or stamp
at each control
to prove that
they have
been there.
The judge at the finish has a template showing the
exact locations of all controls. Laying the template
on top of the competitor’s map will reveal any
errors in marking.
32 ORIENTEERING
Competitive Orienteering.


General Orienteering Rules
Orienteering USA is the ruling body for sanctioned orienteering events
in the United States. Its rule book is comprehensive and addresses the
technicalities of holding an event, as well as conduct that is expected
of the participants. A few general rules are provided below, but for
detailed information, it is best to consult the rule book or to contact
the OUSA.
1. Competitors who have prior knowledge of the course that will give
them an unfair advantage should not participate. Investigation of
the course before an event is forbidden.
2. The use of any navigational aid other than a compass is prohibited,
including GPS (global positioning system) units, altimeters, and
pedometers. Competitors may use only a compass and the map
provided by the organizer.
3. Competitors cannot use outside help nor collaborate with
other competitors.
4. It is unfair to profit from the skills of the other competitors.
5. Competitors must move over the course as quietly as possible,
so as not to disturb or aid fellow competitors.
6. All participants should be aware of how danger areas are identified
and avoid them.
7. It is a competitor’s duty to help anyone who is injured.
8. Competitors must not damage competition terrain.
9. Competitors must close all gates and barriers that they may
have opened.
10. Competitors must stay out of yards, gardens, planted fields,
limited-access roads, railway corridors, and areas marked “Out of
Bounds.” The only exception to this is if permission has been given
in the race instructions.
11. If competitors have not completed the course by the designated
closing time, they must report to the race authorities at the finish
line and turn in control cards and maps. They must not remain on
the course past the competition close. Competitors must never
leave the course area without informing race officials.
Source: Adapted from “Selected Rules of Orienteering,” a summary by Joe Scarborough,
in Orienteering: The Sport of Navigating with Map and Compass, by Steven Boga,
Stackpole Books, 1997.
ORIENTEERING 33
.Competitive Orienteering


Memory Orienteering
In a memory orienteering competition, competitors are
shown only one leg of the course at a time, and they must
memorize it before setting off for the control point. The
course is completed through a series of memorization and
movement legs. This is excellent practice in training the
mind to learn information quickly and accurately. This skill
is essential to be competitive in orienteering, in that it is
directly related to speed.
Trail Orienteering
Trail orienteering is a competitive form of national and inter-
national orienteering that is suitable for people with physical
disabilities. Participants use high-quality trails to get near the
controls, where they must determine the correct control from
several choices.
International Control Description
Symbols and Sheets
Competitors get a control description or clue sheet and map
before or at the start of an orienteering event. For beginners’
courses, the clues are given in symbols and written out in
words, but for intermediate and advanced competitors, the
clues are given in a table format with symbols. A lot of
information can be given, and the best competitors read
carefully to get as much information as possible.
To promote international competition, the IOF has
standardized the maps and symbols used. This makes
it possible for orienteers to compete in events in any
country, even without understanding that country’s
language. The symbols are easy to learn. You can guess
what most mean without a description.
34 ORIENTEERING
Competitive Orienteering.


Examine the sample control description sheet shown here.
The top of the sheet shows the level of competition (yellow),
the course distance in meters (1.64 kilometers), and the meters
of vertical climb along the route (70 meters).
Column A shows the control points in the order they are
visited, numbers 1 through 8. Column B shows the control
codes used in the competition, followed by a “description”
of each control’s location in the rest of the columns. (See the
international control description symbols shown on the
following pages.) The last line describes how competitors
will approach the finish from the last control—in the example,
a 136-meter marked route to the finish.
136
Yellow
Start
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
1.64K 70m
Start path junction
Road bend
Building northeast outside corner
Path crossing ditch
Special item
Path junction pipeline
Ditch crossing pipeline
Boulder cluster
Building southwest outside corner
136m marked route to finish
Column A B C D E F G H
121
114
101
159
132
164
166
191
Control description sheet for yellow course
ORIENTEERING 35
.Competitive Orienteering


Southern
Northeastern
Upper
Lower
Middle
Steep bank
Quarry
Earthbank, dam
Terrace
Spur
Rib
Re-entrant
Gully
Dry ditch
Hill
Knoll
Saddle
Depression
Small depression
Pit
Cliff, crag
Bare rock
Cave
Boulder
Boulder field
Stony ground
Cairn/stone pile
Narrow passage (between cliffs)
Lake
Pond
Water hole
Stream
Ditch
Marsh
Small marsh
Firm ground
Well
Spring
Narrow marsh
Seasonal watercourse
Open land, field
Semiopen land
Forest corner
Clearing
Thicket
Felled area
Vegetation boundary
Copse
Hedge
Linear thicket
Road
Path
Narrow ride
Wall
Fence
Footbridge
Column C: Which Feature
(of any similar ones)?
Column D: The Control Feature
Column D (continued)
International Control Description Symbols
36 ORIENTEERING


Building
Ruin
Tower
Power line
Power line pylon/pole
Shooting platform
Fodder rack
Rock pillar
Single tree
Salt lick
Root stock
Boundary stone
Charcoal burning ground
Anthill
Broken ground
Special feature
Special feature
Shallow
Deep
Overgrown
Open
Rocky
Marshy
Sandy
Coniferous
Deciduous
Ruined or collapsed
Height in meters
Size in meters (length/width)
Height of object on slope
North side
Northwest edge
East corner (inside)
Southwest corner
Southern tip
Western part
Upper part (head)
Lower part (foot)
On top of
Southern foot
Southwest end
Between
Bend
At the foot
Refreshments
Radio control
Manned control
First aid
Column F: Dimensions of the Feature
Column G: Location of the Marker
Column H: Other Information
Column D (continued)
Column E: Details of Appearance
ORIENTEERING 37


Orienteering Techniques
Orienteers use a number of techniques to choose their routes
along a course.
Handrails
Handrails are linear features along the leg of a course that lead
you in the direction you want to go and provide easier travel,
continuous direction, and a more accurate position. Orienteers’
handrails can be either natural or artificial features such as
Even the most
skilled orienteer
should always be
looking for naviga-
tional handrails in
the terrain.
In this illustration, the orienteer follows the pipeline handrail almost directly to the
control location.
7 6
38 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering Techniques.


streams, trails, roads, fences, and power lines. More obscure
handrails might be ridge lines, valleys, tree lines, forest fire
burns, or avalanche scars.
Beginners’ courses rely heavily on handrails to help the
novice get to each control. The route for the easiest courses
may actually go right down a trail or road—the handrail. As
the orienteer’s skills develop and the courses become more
difficult, handrails become less obvious, but the terrain will
have usable handrails if the map reader is skilled enough to
pick them out from the details.
Collecting, Check-Off, and Catching Features
Always look around and take note of the features you pass
as you move toward the next control. There may be some
obvious features along the route, such as a large pond or small
lake, that will help send you in the right direction. These are
collecting features, which lie between you and the control.
Equally important but less obvious are check-off features,
which you will see along the way. You can constantly verify
your position by making a mental note as you pass the features
and moving your thumb along the map as you go.
A catching feature lies beyond the control. This term
makes sense if you think of a catching feature as a landmark
that warns you that you have actually passed the control.
The feature catches you!
Attack Point
An attack point is a large, easily recognized feature that is near
the control. The attack point helps you determine your exact
location and reach the control. From the attack point, you can
use precise navigation, such as an accurate bearing and pace
counting, to carefully zero in on the control. The route from the
attack point to the control may be so obvious, or so restricted,
that you might not even have to take a compass bearing.
Generally, orienteering relies more heavily on the map than
the compass.
In using collecting
points, check-off,
and catching fea-
tures, remember
that features on
older maps may
have long since
disappeared.
ORIENTEERING 39
.Orienteering Techniques


Aiming Off or Offset Technique
If a control or attack point is on a linear feature, such as a road,
it can be more efficient and safer to deliberately aim off to one
side of the straight line that heads to the feature. If you arrive
at the linear feature and do not see the control, you will then
know which way to turn to find it.
Reading Ahead
Keep a clear mental picture of the terrain that you will pass
through. Read the map every few seconds, think beyond your
location, and plan ahead. The best way to practice reading
ahead is to take time at the beginning of the course and after
each control to make sure you understand what the map is
telling you. Do not move until you are sure. It is just as impor-
tant to keep oriented every moment while you are traveling
and to keep an eye on what lies ahead. Keep your map out
In this map, it would be easy to reach the road and not be
sure what direction the control lies. To prevent this, you can
deliberately aim a few meters south of the control so you
know to turn north when you get to the road.
A B
40 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering Techniques.


and refer to it often. Make sure that what you are seeing on
the ground matches what the map tells you should be there.
If you find this is not the case, then either you are reading the
map wrong or you have strayed from your intended course.
Contouring
Sometimes, the direct up-and-over or down-and-up route
between controls is not the best. Take a few seconds to calcu-
late the elevation where you are standing and the elevation
at the next control. Are they roughly the same? If they are, it
may be best to follow a route that stays at the same elevation.
That route is plainly marked on the map—the contour line!
You should consider contouring even if there is quite a
difference in the length of the straight-line route versus the
contour-line route. The route may look faster as the crow flies,
but that may be deceptive.
Following the
contour line is
called contouring,
and it is often the
most efficient path
of travel between
two points in
rough terrain.
In this example, a person who is contouring would follow a
route that is level or downhill. The direct route would mean a
climb of 10 to 15 meters (33 to 50 feet). Although the distance
to contour is greater, the effort expended is less.
A B
ORIENTEERING 41
.Orienteering Techniques


Relocation
When a person is lost or potentially lost, whether on a road
in a city, deep in a complex cave, in the wilderness, or on
an orienteering course, the best thing to do is stop. The worst
thing to do is to keep moving, because the problem will not
correct itself; it will get worse. And time lost in correcting the
problem will skyrocket.
If you don’t know where you are, stop and relocate. Find
a definite feature that you can correctly locate. This should
be relatively easy to do if you took the time before the start to
compare the map with the terrain and make a mental note of
relocation features such as lakes and ponds, where two streams
intersect, or perhaps a bridge where a stream goes under a
road. Almost anything will work, but it must be prominent
enough so that you do not confuse it with other features. If
you mix up relocation sites, you will really be lost and might
have to retrace part of the route to find a recognizable point.
Contouring is also
useful for avoiding
obstacles. Trail
builders do this
all the time.
If they did not,
nobody would
want to go hiking!
42 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering Techniques.
x
x
x
xxx
In this example, the control location is the lower end
of an intermittent stream shown by the circle. When
you arrive at where you think it should be, you can’t
find the control bag. You could be at any of the stream
ends marked by the small X’s. Which way should you
go? The large impassable cliff or the long earthbank
shown by the arrows would be impossible to miss.
To pinpoint your location, go west along the shore-
line until you encounter one of these. Moving to
a known position is always a better choice than
aimless searching.


Rough Versus Fine Orienteering
The search for the next control point in an orienteering prob-
lem often can be divided into two distinct phases: the rough
orienteering phase and the fine orienteering phase.
In the rough phase, you are moving in broadly defined
directions toward a collection point found on the map. This is
the time for covering a lot of ground quickly. You will not be
in danger of missing the control during this phase because the
control will not be close at hand yet.
Once you reach the chosen collection point, it is time to
switch to fine orienteering. Locate yourself precisely, and deter-
mine where you are in relation to the control. Form a plan that
will accurately lead you to the control. This may involve using
handrails, attack points, and compass bearings. Proceed to the
control as quickly as possible, but remember that in this phase
accuracy is the primary goal.
Route Choice
Orienteering allows competitors to choose their route around
the course, introducing an element of skill that complements
physical fitness. When confronted with many possible routes,
you should consider the following:
• Terrain barriers or obstacles, vegetation
• Off-limit areas
• Artificial features and the presence of landmarks, handrails,
collecting features, catching features, and attack points
• Your level of physical fitness
• The adequacy of your clothing for certain routes
Orienteers in
complex terrain
are always
checking behind
them as they
go forward.
This gives them
the option of
relocating to
familiar terrain.
Rough orienteering the whole way will cause a lot
of aimless thrashing about, but fine orienteering all
the way will waste valuable time. As orienteering
involves a combination of speed and accuracy, so,
too, does each leg of an orienteering course.
ORIENTEERING 43
.Orienteering Techniques


As the courses progress from the (novice) white level
to the advanced beginner yellow, intermediate orange, and
advanced brown, green, red, and blue courses, better route-
finding skills become desirable, and then essential. The most
advanced courses may have many options for reaching the
control but only one or two really good ones.
Vegetation
FIGHT! This word is the orienteer’s expression for vegetation
that is nearly impenetrable. If you see fight on a map, or its
color equivalent—dark green—you are in for “vegetable com-
bat” if you try to go through it. It probably is chock-full with
undergrowth and deadfall. Unless
the proposed route is marked
runnable or is light green or,
even better, white on the map,
you should consider another
route. A 1,000-meter detour
might leave you fresh and smiling
at the control and relieved that
you did not take the 100-meter
shortcut that left another orienteer
scratched and haggard. That
orienteer has been in a fight,
while you were just having fun!
Elevation
No matter how sweet a route
looks otherwise, if a hill sits
between you and the control, it
will slow your time. How much?
That depends on the steepness of
the hill, but a good rule of thumb
is that 15 meters of climb is equal
to running about 100 meters on
flat ground. So a 45-meter hill
will be equivalent to running
300 meters. If you can contour
around the hill in less than 300 meters, then go around rather
than over. Sometimes the next control is situated at a higher
elevation than the last. In this case you have no option but to
go up.
Moving through
thick vegetation
may take up to
10 times as long
as moving along
an open trail.
44 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering Techniques.


Once you master
the basic map
reading and
compass skills,
the winning edge
often will come
down to route
choice. And this
skill depends a lot
on experience.
Steps in Choosing a Route
Route choice will be simplified if each time you set
out for a control you:
1. Note the exact location of the control on
the map and read its description from the
description sheet.
2. Choose an attack point (if the control is not
placed in an obvious position) very close
to a feature that you can easily recognize—
a bridge, a trail junction, power lines over a
path, a corner of a forest.
3. Look at the direct route from your present
position to the attack point. See whether it
will be easy to follow on a compass bearing.
4. Look to the left and right of the direct route
and see whether there is an easier and
quicker route. An indirect route may require
less hill climbing and pushing through
dense woods. Remember that a climb of 15
meters is roughly equal to hiking 100 meters
on flat ground.
5. Take the fastest route to the attack point.
6. Run as fast as possible to the attack point,
using collecting features to find the way.
7. Take an accurate compass bearing (if neces-
sary) from the attack point to the control.
8. Measure the exact distance on the map from
the attack point to the control.
9. Walk or jog accurately on a compass bearing,
counting the paces until you find the control.
ORIENTEERING 45
.Orienteering Techniques


Route Choice Examples
Study the four points on the route choice illustration. The
obvious route from the start triangle to point No. 1 is along
the road. Course setters often will make the first control easy
so competitors can get used to the map.
You have a choice to make from No. 1 to No. 2. The easi-
est route goes along the main road and then north at the trail
to the building. A more direct route is along the power line
and across the secondary road to the boulders, where you
can take a bearing directly to the building. It is shorter, but
vegetation may slow your progress.
It is a difficult choice from No. 2 to No. 3. The easy but
long way is south on the trail, east on the road, northeast on
46 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering Techniques.


the secondary road, and then north along the trail. You will
always know exactly where you are on the map. While the
direct route uses a bearing and is much shorter, you must cross
two streambeds and vegetation.
From No. 3 to No. 4 the choice is easier. A direct course is
probably faster, as the woods are open (white color—runnable)
and the road you will cross is a great collecting feature that
you can’t miss. In addition, the feature is near the top of a
hill, making it easy to find. Going south on the trail and then
northeast on the road is easy travel but twice as far.
Examine the rest of the sample yellow course in the
“Competitive Orienteering” section. Decide which route you
would take between the remaining points. There usually is
not one correct answer; nevertheless, route choice is the key
to successful orienteering.
ORIENTEERING 47
.Orienteering Techniques
43
2
1





Setting Up a Competition
When you take a turn at setting up an orienteering course
and competition, you will see the sport in a different light.
As a competitor your main goal on race day is to decipher the
course and move around it as quickly and accurately as pos-
sible. As an organizer, you must begin thinking about the race
weeks in advance. When? Where? How? and Who? are all ques-
tions you will have to address in setting up a competition.
When are you going to put on the competition? Maybe
during camp or at a jamboree, on a summer evening, or on a
weekend. You will have to choose a date and time, and let pro-
spective participants know about it.
The where of the course will be a site that is both challeng-
ing and safe, and a site for which a map is available. Consider
city and state parks, as well as areas controlled by Scouting
America. National forest areas also might be a possibility.
How will the competition be conducted? Will it be a cross-
country or a score event? How difficult will the competition
be? How long will the course be? Will the start and finish be
at the same place? Will winners receive awards? What sort of
refreshments will you provide for finishers?
Who will compete? Will it be for your patrol only, or will
you invite the entire troop? Maybe it will be a team event
where patrols compete against one another.
These are just some of the details that need to be worked
out in setting up an orienteering competition. To plan the best
event possible, a team of Scouts and leaders working closely
together probably will be needed. Maybe your patrol could put
on the competition for another patrol and then the other patrol
could set up a competition for yours. This way, each group
experiences the thrill of competing but also comes to under-
stand orienteering in a much deeper way.
Be sure that
you always
get permission
beforehand from
the landowner,
whether that
be a private
individual or gov-
ernment agency.
ORIENTEERING 49
.Setting Up a Competition


First-Aid Equipment
A comprehensive first-aid kit should be available at the start
and finish—two kits if these areas are separated. A patrol
or troop first-aid kit will treat a range of injuries. The most
common types of injuries will be foot
injuries, strains and sprains, and cuts
and bruises. Blister treatments, ice
and support bandages, and other
bandages and dressing should
be available. Additionally, each
participant may carry a personal
first-aid kit for those small inju-
ries that might occur away from
the start and finish areas. (See
also the chapter “Orienteering
First Aid.”)
Equipment
For a good orienteering competition, the following equipment and
materials are necessary:
• Competitors’ maps for
each competitor
• Control cards, one
per competitor
• Two recorder’s sheets
• Control description sheets,
one for each competitor
• Two time clocks
• Start sign
• Finish sign
• Rope with pegs to make a
finishing tunnel
• Results board
• One control marker or punch
per control point
• Extra compasses
• Whistle, for starting
• First-aid kit
• Colored tape or ribbon for
marking administrative lanes,
and routes from the start to
the master map and from the
last control point to the finish
If the course maps are not
preprinted, you will need to
mount three to five master
maps on card tables so that
each competitor can copy the
course to a blank map.
50 ORIENTEERING
Setting Up a Competition.


Safety
Safety is the No. 1 concern for all orienteering competitions.
Strive to prevent injury by stressing that competitors must
make wise decisions. At least one member of the team putting
on the competition should be trained in first aid. A plan should
be in place in the event of a serious injury, including how
to contact medical personnel and facilities. All competitors
should be briefed on safety procedures. When appropriate,
they should write this information on their maps.
Safety Lane
A well-laid-out course should have a safety lane where
competitors may go if hurt, too tired to finish, or lost.
Usually the safety lane is on the boundary of the course.
It could be a major feature like a fence, power line,
clear-cut, or road that bisects the area. All a competitor
needs to do is set a standard bearing on the compass
and follow it until reaching the lane. After the competition,
if some competitors have not returned, the officials drive
along the boundaries of the course to pick up orienteers
who have retreated to the safety lane.
On the Sid Richardson Scout Ranch map, the main
road running the length of the ranch is used as the
safety lane. On the sample yellow course in the “Competitive
Orienteering” section, the safety lane is located west to the
main camp road.
Final Return Time
All orienteering events must have a final return time.
Competitors must return to the finish by then, regardless
of whether they have completed the course. Failure to do so
will result in a search being mounted. Competitors should
have a watch and a signaling device as part of their basic
emergency gear.
The First Aid merit badge pamphlet and the
Scouts BSA handbook cover basic first aid for
a variety of situations. Portions of those books
have been condensed in the “Orienteering First
Aid” chapter.
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R G I R L S
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R B O Y SFIRST AID
ORIENTEERING 51
.Setting Up a Competition


Location
The framework of all orienteering courses is the competition
site and its map. Each must be considered before any detailed
planning of an orienteering event is possible.
Area With an Existing Map
Even more than the compass, the map is the foundation of
orienteering. Without it, there is no course. There are two
options: Find an area that has an existing map, or make a
map of the area yourself.
The first option is easiest. You may be surprised to
discover the number of areas that have been mapped.
Probably the maps most available to the general public are
the USGS 7.5-minute quadrangle topographic maps, which
have a scale of 1:24,000, where 1 inch on the map equals
2,000 feet on the ground. The topographic features of these
maps may not be found on other maps. These are available
through local suppliers or from the USGS itself. Other gov-
ernment agencies such as the Forest Service, National Park
Service, the Bureau of Land Management, state geological
surveys, state park and recreation agencies, and county and
city parks departments will have maps of varying usefulness.
Private property will be the least likely to have been mapped,
unless a government agency did it.
Because of the increasing popularity of the sport of
orienteering, more and more maps designed specifically for
orienteering are available, such as the centerfold map of Sid
Richardson Scout Ranch. Such maps are often large-scale
maps, typically 1:15,000 or even 1:10,000, and have legends
From World War II through
the late 1980s, the USGS
made more than 57,000
7.5-minute maps covering the 48 mainland states.
Today, the USGS produces more than 80,000 maps.
These include the 7.5-minute series and topographic
maps at smaller scales, maps of U.S. possessions
and territories and of Antarctica, special maps of
national parks and monuments, and geologic and
hydrologic maps.
52 ORIENTEERING
Setting Up a Competition.


and colors especially relating to orienteering. If you plan to run
a competition in an urban area, it would be worthwhile to ask
local orienteering groups whether maps are available of the
area you intend to use.
Lastly, some cartography companies will create maps to
your specifications.
Area Without an Existing Map
Creating your own map sounds like a lot of hard work, but
actually, it is not that hard, and it can be a lot of fun, too.
Before you start the mapping process, you should have a
pretty good idea of how long the course will be, the direction
of travel, the locations of the controls, and the relationship
of the finish to the start.
Most orienteering maps are made with a computer pro-
gram called OCAD. You can download a demonstration version
online. It is fully operational but limited in capacity. This is
the standard for today’s orienteering maps.
Another way of converting a USGS topographic map is
to lay tracing paper or clear plastic over the old map, tracing
what you want from the old map and adding detail specific
to orienteering.
It is always wise
to field-check
anything included
on your new
map—riverbeds
change, structures
collapse, roads
come and go,
homes are built,
ponds are con-
structed, swamps
are drained, etc.
The easiest low-tech way to create a course map is
to take an existing map, such as a USGS topographic
map, and add more detail to it. This detail could
include IOF symbols, IOF terminology, orienteering
vegetation colors, and magnetic north lines. You can
even change the scale of the old map to one that
conforms better with IOF standards. You can make
the changes right on the old map.
Aerial photos and satellite photos are available
for free on the internet, such as the USGS website.
Be sure to get your parent or guardian’s permission
before downloading anything from the internet.
ORIENTEERING 53
.Setting Up a Competition


Creating a map from scratch requires a little preliminary
scouting of the area. Take a half-day to thoroughly familiarize
yourself with things such as the terrain, vegetation, natural
and artificial features, hazards, and potential control sites.
Take a small notebook along to record information about
the site that you want to remember as you make your map.
Understand the general lay of the land. This will begin to give
you ideas about how and where you can lay out the course.
Take a few minutes after your reconnaissance (inspection)
of the area to plot a rough course in your notebook. You will
modify and fine-tune this working model of your course when
you return to map the area. Unless you plan your course, you
will waste time mapping areas that the course does not use.
This little bit of planning allows you to show up at the
start point, ready to map. Take a blank sheet of paper on a
clipboard, several sharpened pencils (working in pencil allows
easy changes), a ruler, and an orienteering compass. Use the
ruler to help you draw parallel lines on the paper to represent
magnetic north lines, in effect making the sheet of paper speak
the language of the compass. The top of each line points to
magnetic north. Indicate this on the top of the paper.
Two other questions remain to be answered before setting
off: What will the scale of your map be, and where should you
put the starting point on the blank sheet of paper? Because of
your preliminary work, these questions
should be relatively easy to answer. For
instance, if the roughed-out course goes
north, west, south, and then back east,
it would be best to place the starting
point on the paper in the lower right-
hand (southeast) corner. This allows the
course to remain on the paper. Mark an
X on the paper to indicate the start.
The map’s scale also will determine
whether it will cover one or more sheets
of paper. Generally, it is best to use only
one sheet. A scale of 1:1,200 will allow
a closed circle course of about 1,200
meters to fit onto a single sheet, while a
scale of 1:2,400 will double the terrain
that you can fit onto the page but will
decrease the map’s detail.
54 ORIENTEERING
Setting Up a Competition.


You are now ready to begin mapping.
1. Standing at the start (which you should mark so that you
can return to it easily), take a compass bearing to the
first point.
2. Plot this bearing onto the paper by placing the edge of
the compass on the X and rotating the compass until the
orienting arrow or the north-south lines of the compass
are parallel to the magnetic north lines on the paper.
3. Using the edge of the compass, draw a line onto the paper.
The point lies somewhere along this line. To determine
where, walk to it as you count your paces. If you have prac-
ticed counting your paces, you will be able to figure how
far the point is and place it accurately onto your line. Put a
small X here. You will take the next bearing from
this point.
This process provides only a “stick figure” map. Add detail
along the bearing lines by noting and sketching in natural and
artificial features as you move along. You can reach a fair level
of accuracy by pacing off distances and taking rough compass
bearings. To locate a feature more precisely, take a bearing on
it from two known points on the route. The feature is located
at the intersection of the two bearings.
ORIENTEERING 55
.Setting Up a Competition


Walk around the intended course taking bearings and
plotting them onto the map until you return either to the
starting point or to a separate finish.
You now have a rough field map of the area. Tidy it up
and add as much detail as you like. Particularly important are a
scale relating distance to pace and a magnetic north arrow. You
can add symbols for certain terrain features and color to show
vegetation. Make sure you explain the symbols and colors in a
map legend. Date your map, as features change with time. Give
it a name, and put your name on it as mapmaker.
Once you have the area map in hand, whether it be a
preexisting one or one you have made, make individual maps
for each contestant and several master maps. The master map
You probably will not be able to place contour lines on your map.
If the area you are mapping will be used extensively for orienteering,
you could research and use computer software that allows you to
create topographic maps.
56 ORIENTEERING
Setting Up a Competition.


will be available for all contestants to study but not carry with
them. It will contain all the information you wish to give out.
The individual maps do not need to contain everything that is
on the master.
Competition Site
Besides the course, the location for your orienteering event
will require a meeting place for contestants, officials, and
spectators, and areas for checking pace, consulting the master
map, and reporting to race officials for the send-off and finish.
The finish should complement the other facilities without
interfering with the competition.
ASSEMBLY AREA
The assembly area is a gathering place for the participants
and race officials and also may be where first-aid stations are
located. This area should include adequate parking, bicycle
racks, changing rooms, and bathrooms. If changing rooms
and bathrooms are not available at the site, the participants
should be told of this before the race.
A competition
often will include
having the
competitors
copy the needed
information from
the master onto
their individual
maps before
starting out.
The assembly area should be large enough to hold all
competitors and officials at the same time.
ORIENTEERING 57
.Setting Up a Competition


Shelters can help keep participants and spectators com-
fortable during inclement or hot weather. These may exist
on-site, or you may erect temporary ones. Orienteers gather
here to register and receive instructions, maps, control
description sheets, control cards, starting times, and numbers or
numbered bibs. This is also where competitors study their maps
and fill out control cards before moving on to the start.
PACE COURSE
Many beginners may not know their pace, and other competi-
tors may want to check their pace. Set up a pace course over
varied terrain for at least 100 meters. A course of 200 to 300
meters is even better. Mark the course with tape and have
large signs at 100-meter intervals. Encourage competitors to
figure a pace for both walking and running. The pace course
is a good place to combine a pace check with warming up.
THE START
A recorder and timer’s table will be located at the start. After
registering, orienteers report to this area and are checked in
by the recorder and then released at the proper time by the
timer. Intervals between competitors will vary from race to
race, depending on the number of participants, the length of
the course, and the need to keep the contestants separated.
MASTER MAP AREA
Depending on the rules of the course, competitors will visit
the master map area before the competition starts or after each
contestant has been released by the timer. If it is before, it is
best to have several master maps available (three to five) so
that a bottleneck of people waiting to get the information from
the map does not develop. If competitors are to visit the map
after the start, it is best to space them far enough apart so that
It is a good idea to
locate the master
map area out of
sight of the start.
A distance of
100 to 150 meters
from the start will
prevent orienteers
from tracking
one another.
If there are enough helpers, have one stand at each
sign and help young competitors figure out their
pace. Even a single helper standing at the beginning
of the course can answer enough questions to get
first-timers going.
58 ORIENTEERING
Setting Up a Competition.


only one person will be at the map at a time. Only one or two
maps will be needed in this situation.
FINISH
The finish can be at the same place as the start, slightly
removed, or in an entirely different place. Different locations
usually occur in linear courses rather than in circuit courses.
However, just because the course is a circuit does not neces-
sarily mean that contestants will come back to the exact point
where they began. It is sometimes better to separate the
finish and the start by a short distance to ease congestion
and confusion.
When an orienteer reaches the finish, the timer records
the finish time on the orienteer’s control card. The timer then
passes the card to the recorder, who grades and records the
result on the recorder’s sheet. The orienteer’s standing is
determined and posted on the results board.
The orienteer can then take a few minutes to catch their
breath, cool down, and get some refreshments. Have at least
water available at the site, but juice or sports drinks and fruit,
such as oranges and bananas, are welcome. If there is a
possibility of inclement weather, it is a good idea to have a
place, such as a large tent, where competitors can get out of
the rain or wind.
Post approved solution maps for the best routes on the
course at the finish. This is a good place for the competitors to
compare and discuss how they did with one another. Orienteers
can often learn as much from discussing what went right and
what went wrong as from actually running the course. More
experienced orienteers can be available here to answer questions.
Course Setting
The course setter or setting team must try to produce a course
that will challenge but not discourage the competitors. Do not
overestimate the ability of the competitors who will run the
course. It is better to make a course too easy than too hard. A
competitor may not return to the sport after an initial negative
experience. Consider these things:
1. Determine the type of competition. This will help you
figure the amount of area needed. Alternatively, design
the course to fit the area you have available.
If the finish is at
a different place
from the start,
you may have to
duplicate start
facilities there,
including parking,
bathroom, chang-
ing facilities, and
a recorder and
timer’s table.
ORIENTEERING 59
.Setting Up a Competition


2. Determine the amount of time available for the event. This
will give you an idea of the number of control points the
course will have.
3. The type of terrain required depends mainly on the experi-
ence of the competitors. For most Scouting events, a nearby
wooded park is good. Experienced orienteers will find
rougher, more complex terrain—even wilderness—desirable.
4. For beginners, the course should not be very complicated.
Do not give them too many choices.
5. Avoid dangerous areas such as swift streams, highway
crossings, swamps, and utility facilities. When these areas
are present, competitors must be well aware of their
existence. You can inform competitors by noting these
features prominently on the individual maps or by having
a briefing before the competition.
6. The course may cross private property only when permission
has been obtained from the landowner. To use private
property, you may have to provide landowners with liability
waivers. Off-limit and private areas should be noted on
all maps.
After a bit of preliminary thought and planning, it is time to
set off on the actual course-setting. Begin by simply walking
the whole area, taking note of the terrain, obstacles, vegetation,
prominent land forms, roads, paths, and buildings. When you
have a good overview of the area, begin setting the course.
Selecting the Controls
Pick out the “problem” controls (areas that present more of a
challenge to the orienteer), for example, whether to go over or
around a hill. Plot controls for these key sections on the map.
This basic course skeleton along with start and finish locations,
the length of the course, and the number of controls will allow
you to figure the general shape of the course. It is almost like
connecting the dots to get a full picture.
CONTROL DESCRIPTION SHEET
Once you have decided where the controls will be, make a
control description sheet for the course. Each contestant will
be given one of these sheets at the start of the contest.
60 ORIENTEERING
Setting Up a Competition.


Checking the Course
Rarely does the perfect course result from the first attempt.
Because so many factors are considered as you set up a course,
it is easy to overlook something. It might be best if several
Scouts worked on the course together. Afterward, ask your coun-
selors to check the course. This is called vetting the course.
Event Officials
At least three officials will be needed at both the start and
the finish. They may be the same people for both if the start
and finish are at the same location. Their titles and duties are
as follows.
At the Start
The course organizer briefs orienteers in the assembly area,
issues control cards and maps, and calls orienteers forward
to start individually. The recorder writes the names and start
times of every orienteer on the recorder’s sheet, checks each
orienteer’s name and start number on the individual control
cards, and issues last-minute instructions. The timer controls
the master clock and releases the orienteers across the start
line at their start time (usually 1 minute apart) to the master
map area.
At the Finish
The timer records the finish time of each orienteer on their
control card and passes the card to the recorder. The recorder
writes each orienteer’s finish times on the recorder’s sheet and
tallies final scores based on times and correctness
of control points visited. The course organizer verifies the
correctness of names, finish times, and final scores; posts
positions of orienteers on the results board; and accounts for all
orienteers at the end of the event.
A vetter is an
experienced
orienteer who
checks control
placement, routes
to the controls,
control markers,
accuracy of
master maps,
correctness of
descriptive clues,
start, finish, and
anything else
that might affect
the result of
the competition.
Officiating is the third phase of orienteering besides
setting up a course and running in a competition. Each
activity will teach you different things about the sport.
Participation in all three positions will be rewarding for
the knowledge you will gain. There is always room for
more officials and assistants, as those listed above are
the minimum required to run a competition. Volunteer!
ORIENTEERING 61
.Setting Up a Competition


Here are a few basic rules for selecting controls:
1. Give careful thought to the actual placing of the control. Beginners
will find it easier to locate controls on artificial features. Advanced
orienteers will have the skills necessary to identify terrain features
as the site of a control.
2. The control must be a definite point, not an area or a linear feature.
Orienteering is concerned with precision, not “in the ballpark”
direction finding. The fact that an orienteer moves from a definite
point at the start and continues to do so throughout the course
means their score can be accurately compared with every
other competitor’s.
3. The control must be a feature that is not only apparent on the
ground, but also indicated on the course map. This allows both
the course setter and the competitor to locate the control exactly.
Avoid vague descriptions such as “an old tree west of the clearing.”
Courses for inexperienced orienteers should have controls at
easy-to-find locations, such as stream junctions, bridges, hilltops,
and path junctions.
4. An early leg of the course should not pass near a later control. This
will keep competitors from seeing activity near a late control while
in the early stages of the race and being able to make use of this
knowledge later in their circuit.
5. There should be no sharp angles at the controls. This ensures that
the natural exit from a control site is not the same as the entry
route, preventing competitors from finding a control by the path of
a departing runner. Watch out for unintended doglegs. The map may
show no indication of sharp angles from one point to the next, but
take a look at the actual ground. Natural features may channel con-
testants in directions unintended by the course setter, causing com-
petitors to leave a control in full view of oncoming contestants and
giving the next competitors an unfair advantage, or at least helping
them if they are “lost.”
6. The logical route between two controls should not encourage
competitors to go over dangerous terrain or cross private property.
You can place control points so as to encourage competitors to
avoid such areas. The most important rule for course setting is
safety first and always.
62 ORIENTEERING
Setting Up a Competition.


7. In events for experts, the controls should be located so that good
orienteers receive due reward. One method of doing this is to place
the control on the near side of a collecting feature by several hundred
meters. This means that novice orienteers who are off-course will
have to retrace their steps from the collecting feature, while good
navigators will find the site on their first attempt and will not need
the collecting feature.
8. In advanced courses competitors should have to make a route
choice on every control. Orienteering allows contestants to travel
the route pretty much as they choose, within the constraints of a
few rules. This means that orienteers are combining physical skill
with navigational skills. A course for beginners can emphasize
physical skills because navigation over the ground will still be new.
Courses for more advanced orienteers should reward navigation
skills as well as physical ability. This can be accomplished by offer-
ing subtle route choices between relatively equivalent routes or
between good routes and poor ones. The idea is to strive for skill
in the decision-making process and not just luck.
9. Select controls so that a variety of problems can be solved on
the course. Perhaps the placement of two controls could reward
the skill of contouring. Another set might emphasize the use of
handrails and attack points. Yet a third might be designed to test
compass skills. The course will be more interesting if this is done,
and it will teach the competitors more skills as well.
10. Since the spectators, families, and officials see little of the actual
competition, it is a good idea to provide a finish where everyone
can see a portion of the race. An open run-in of the last 200 meters
or so works well. Having the crowd on hand to cheer on the com-
petitors adds a dimension of excitement to the race.
11. Each control marker should be placed where it can be seen easily
by someone who has arrived at the feature. Place it head-high and
directly over the location given by the clue, visible from 25 meters
but not 200 meters away.
ORIENTEERING 63
.Setting Up a Competition


Orienteering First Aid
Orienteering is a physically demanding activity that takes
place over several kilometers of very mixed and often rugged
terrain. Hot weather may result in sunburn, heatstroke, heat
exhaustion, and dehydration, while cold weather can lead to
hypothermia and dehydration. In the hurry to be first, you
might stumble onto dangerous animals or poisonous plants.
Physical Conditioning
The best thing you can do to prevent injury is to be well-rested,
well-fed, and physically fit before going out on an orienteering
course. A normal night’s sleep and healthy meals will help
you endure the rigors of the course and decrease the possibility
of a physical or mental slip that could result in injury. Regular
exercise such as hiking, running, bicycling, skiing, and snow-
shoeing will raise your fitness levels so that any orienteering
course is an exhilarating challenge, not a desperate struggle.
Heat-Related Problems
If you are not physically fit, you may be particularly vulnerable
to heat.
Dehydration
Dehydration is caused by lack of water in the body. Your body
must have water for digestion, respiration, brain activity, and
regulation of body temperature. A person who gives off more
water than consumed can become dehydrated—in hot or cold
weather. Athletes can lose up to 14 pounds of fluid in a day.
To keep up with this loss, drink 1 to 2 cups of liquid 15 to 20
minutes or so after starting the course and every 15 minutes
while on the course. Do not wait to drink until you feel thirsty.
Be prepared!
Before going out,
spend a few
minutes reviewing
possible injuries
and their
treatment. Make
safety your
first priority!
64 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering First Aid.


Before heading
out, warm up
and loosen your
muscles by
stretching,
particularly the
thigh and calf
muscles and
lower-leg tendons.
Heat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion is one result of dehydration. The body
becomes overheated because its cooling methods fail. Watch
for these signs: elevated body temperature (between 98.6 and
102 degrees); skin pale and clammy—even cool to the touch;
heavy sweating; nausea, dizziness, and fainting; pronounced
weakness and tiredness; headache; muscle cramps. To treat
heat exhaustion, have the victim lie down in a shady, cool spot
with the feet raised. Loosen the clothing. Apply cool, damp
cloths to the skin or use a fan. Have the victim sip water.
Heatstroke
Heatstroke (sunstroke) is far more serious but less common
than heat exhaustion. It is life-threatening because the body’s
heat control system has been overworked and overwhelmed,
resulting in its failure and a skyrocketing body temperature.
Watch for these signs: body temperature above 102 degrees
(often above 105 degrees); red, hot, and dry skin; no sweat-
ing; extremely rapid pulse; confusion or disorientation; fainting
or unconsciousness; convulsions. The victim must be cooled
immediately. Place the victim in a cool, shaded spot face-up
with head and shoulders raised. Remove outer clothing, sponge
the bare skin with cold water, and soak underclothing with
cool water. Apply cold packs, use a fan, or place the victim in
a tub of cold water. Dry the skin after the body temperature
drops to 101 degrees. Obtain medical help immediately.
Sunburn
Sunburn is a common but potentially serious result of expo-
sure to sun. Long-term exposure can result in skin damage
and skin cancer. The physical effort of orienteering can
lure a person into removing clothing to help keep cool,
exposing skin to the sun. You can prevent sunburn best
by wearing loose-fitting clothing that completely covers
the arms and legs and a broad-brimmed hat to shade the
neck and face. Apply sunscreen with a sun protection
factor (SPF) of at least 15 to exposed skin. Reapply sun-
screen often and as needed.
When applying sunscreen, don’t forget your
ears and the back of your neck.
ORIENTEERING 65
.Orienteering First Aid


Cold-Related Problems—Hypothermia
Hypo means “a lack of”; thermia means “heat.” Hypothermia
occurs when the body’s core temperature drops so low that it
is no longer possible to keep warm. Hypothermia can happen
in relatively mild weather, and the victim may not be aware
that there is a problem. Cool, windy, and rainy weather are
particularly dangerous. The key to preventing hypothermia
is to keep warm and stay dry, and eat plenty of energy foods
(nuts, dried fruits, peanut butter). Don’t push yourself to a
dangerous point of fatigue.
A person in the early stages of hypothermia may be shiv-
ering. As the victim becomes even colder, the shivering will
stop. Other symptoms may include irritability, disorientation,
sleepiness, incoherence, and the inability to think clearly or
make rational decisions. In growing confusion, the victim
might have no idea that there is any danger and may aggres-
sively reject suggestions to stop and get warm. Rewarm the
victim and prevent further heat loss by moving the victim to a
shelter, removing damp clothing, and warming the person with
blankets until body temperature returns to normal. Cover the
head with a warm hat or other covering, and offer hot drinks.
If the condition progresses, you must actively warm the
victim’s body. Place the victim into a sleeping bag with one
or two other people. All should be stripped of clothing so
that skin-to-skin contact can hasten the warming—and
perhaps save a life. Severe hypothermia requires immediate
medical attention.
If you suspect hypothermia because someone is
acting strangely, challenge the orienteer to walk a
30-foot line scratched on the ground. If an orienteer
can walk heel-to-toe for the length of the line with-
out difficulty, hypothermia is still not a problem.
However, unsteadiness, loss of balance, or other
signs of disorientation require quick action to see
that the orienteer gets warm and dry.
66 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering First Aid.


Cuts, Scratches, Puncture Wounds,
and Blisters
Running through brush, trees, swampy areas, and uneven
terrain on orienteering courses can easily lead to minor inju-
ries. These types of injuries can easily be prevented by dressing
appropriately for the activity (jeans, shoes, socks,
long sleeves).
Cuts, abrasions, and scratches usually require little
attention other than to clean them with soap and water and
disinfectant. Leave them to heal in the air, or cover them
lightly with a dry, sterile dressing. Unless a cut is serious,
bleeding probably will stop on its own or with slight pressure
on the wound. Clean and disinfect the wound, then cover with
a sterile dressing or bandage.
More severe wounds may not stop bleeding readily. Apply
direct and firm pressure to such wounds with a sterile dressing
or compress. It may help to raise the injured limb (if no bones
are broken) above heart-level. Apply pressure to the local
artery. If the bleeding is prolonged, treat for shock and seek
medical attention immediately.
Puncture wounds, caused by something piercing the
skin, often do not bleed very much and are difficult to clean.
Encourage bleeding to help remove anything that might have
been forced inside the wound. Use sterile tweezers or a sterile
needle to pull out any foreign matter that you can see. Clean
the wound as thoroughly as possible with soap and water,
rinse well with clear water, and apply disinfectant. Allow the
wound to air dry, then cover it with a clean, dry bandage.
Tetanus is a very
real danger with
puncture wounds.
Be sure that the
injured person
sees a physician
as soon as
possible for
a tetanus shot
if necessary.
Always consider blood to be a potential source of
infection; never touch someone else’s blood with
bare skin. Always use a protective barrier such as
disposable gloves, and wash thoroughly afterward
with soap and water.
ORIENTEERING 67
.Orienteering First Aid


Stings and Bites
Orienteering requires you to be aware of your surroundings
and take precautions so that you can stay safe and comfortable.
No matter how much insect repellent you apply, stings and
bites from insects will happen. The best prevention is to pay
attention where you walk, run, and step, and don’t place your
hands, feet, or head into blind areas of vegetation, wood, or
rock. Treat ordinary insect stings by scraping the stinger out
with the blade of a knife. Don’t try to squeeze it out; that will
force more venom into the skin. Elevate the affected part,
gently wash the area, and apply hydrocortisone cream if you
have it.
Take precautions
to help prevent
blisters by
using the
proper footwear.
Blisters on the feet are common injuries among
outdoors enthusiasts, and they can certainly make
life miserable. A “hot spot” is a warning that a
blister is forming. It is a pinkish area caused by the
rubbing of a shoe or boot.
Stop as soon as you notice the discomfort of
a hot spot, and treat the area. Cut several pieces
of moleskin (every orienteering first-aid kit should
have this item) slightly larger than the hot spot. Cut
out the center of each piece of moleskin so that it is
like a small doughnut, and stack the pieces over the
sore area with the holes arranged directly over the
most painful part. Tape the stack in place. This will
help keep pressure off the hot spot and, with luck,
no blister will appear. If a blister does appear, apply
a gel pad from the first-aid kit directly over the blis-
ter before adding the doughnut bandage. This will
help reduce friction and speed healing.
68 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering First Aid.


If you have
0.5 percent
hydrocortisone
cream, apply it to
help soothe insect
stings and bites.
A wasp, hornet, or bee sting can cause severe
allergic reactions in some people. Those people should take
a field treatment kit with them on all outings, and their
companions should be familiar with its use. If a sting reaction
on an arm or leg is particularly severe, isolate its effect by tying
a constricting band between the sting and the heart. The
band must be loose enough for a finger to slide under it.
Cool the wound with water (or ice, if available). Monitor
the victim’s breathing and do rescue breathing if necessary.
Seek medical help.
Fire ant stings can be extremely painful. You can spot fire
ants by their distinctive loose mounds of dirt. When disturbed,
these aggressive ants will swarm and attack as a group and
sting repeatedly. Their stings form tiny blisters; take care not to
break the blisters. Wash the injured area well with antiseptic or
soap and water, then cover with a sterile bandage.
The stings of the common scorpion usually are not as
dangerous as bee stings. The stings often cause severe, sharp
pain, swelling, and discoloration, but generally cause no
lasting ill effects. To relieve itching and pain from a common
scorpion sting, apply ice packs or a cold compress if you have
it. An over-the-counter antihistamine also can be given. If the
victim has a history of allergic reactions to insect stings or
shows signs of illness (persistent pain and swelling, numbness,
breathing difficulties), and doesn’t respond to the prescribed
antidote, get medical help as soon as possible.
Rarely, an orienteer may encounter a venomous spider
or scorpion. Of particular concern are the bites of the black
widow spider (identified by a red hourglass on the underside of
its abdomen) and the brown recluse spider (recognizable by the
fiddle-shaped mark on its back). Less common are stings from
the venomous scorpions found in the desert areas of Arizona,
California, and New Mexico. A bite or a sting from one of these
creatures should be treated in basically the same manner:
• Ice the bite.
• Have the person lie still and, if possible, keep the bite area
lower than the heart.
• Tie a constricting band (loose enough to slip a finger between
it and the skin) between the bite and the heart.
Bumblebee
ORIENTEERING 69
.Orienteering First Aid


• Treat for shock, and watch for
difficulty in breathing; give
rescue breathing if required.
• Seek immediate medical attention.
Ticks feed on blood
by embedding their head
into the skin. They can
carry diseases such as
Lyme disease and
Rocky Mountain spotted
fever. Remove a tick as
soon as it is discovered by
grasping its head as close to
the skin as possible with twee-
zers or gloved fingertips; gently
tease the critter from the wound. Don’t
squeeze, twist, or jerk the tick; that could break off the mouth
parts, which would remain in the skin. Wash the wound area
carefully with soap and water or an alcohol swab, and apply
antiseptic. After handling a tick, wash your hands thoroughly.
Always avoid
direct contact with
a tick because
disease can be
transmitted by
finger contact.
Black widow spider
Brown recluse spider
Tick
70 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering First Aid.


Snakebite
If you are bitten by a snake, assume
that it is poisonous unless it can be
absolutely identified. The ability to
recognize poisonous varieties allows
a person to take evasive action when
necessary and speeds proper treatment
when a bite has occurred.
Two types of poisonous snakes
are present in the United States. Pit
vipers (rattlesnakes, copperheads,
cottonmouths) have triangular-shaped
heads with pits on each side in front
of the eyes. Coral snakes have black
snouts and bands of red and yellow
separated by bands of black. Coral
snakes inject a powerful venom that
works on the nervous system of the
victim; pit viper venom affects the
circulatory system.
A pit viper bite is likely if there
are puncture marks, pain and swelling
(possibly severe), skin discoloration,
nausea and vomiting, shallow breath-
ing, blurred vision, and shock. A coral
snakebite is marked by a slowing of
physical and mental reactions, sleepi-
ness, nausea, shortness of breath, con-
vulsions, shock, and coma.
Treatment for either type of poi-
sonous snakebite is best done under
medical supervision. Obtain medical
help for the victim as quickly as pos-
sible. While doing this it is important
to limit the spread of the venom and
to maintain vital signs. Keep the vic-
tim calm, and gently wash the wound
site. Remove rings and other jewelry
before the area swells. If the bite is
on an extremity, restrict movement as
much as possible by loosely splinting.
Keep the bite site at the approximate
Copperhead
Cottonmouth moccasin
Rattlesnake
ORIENTEERING 71
.Orienteering First Aid


Oils from poison ivy, poison oak, and poison sumac
can contaminate clothing. Immediately remove and
isolate contaminated clothing, and launder as soon as
you get home.
level of the heart. Do not apply ice or attempt to cut the skin
or suck out the venom. Do not apply a constricting band or
elastic bandage.
Poisonous and Pesky Plants
You can prevent most problems with poisonous plants by being
able to identify them and by being careful. Poison ivy, poison oak,
and poison sumac are the three most common troublemakers;
learn how to identify these plants and avoid them.
If you have touched or even just brushed against one
of these plants, immediately wash the skin thoroughly with
soap and water to help prevent the rash from developing; the
sap must be on your skin for 10 to 20 minutes before it causes
problems. Further cleanse the area with rubbing alcohol.
If a rash develops, apply hydrocortisone cream (0.5 percent
strength) if you have it, to help relieve the itching. Scratching
the affected area will cause the irritation to spread. Unless
the rash becomes severe, further medical attention is
not necessary.
Remember this ditty for safety around coral snakes: red and black—friendly jack; red
and yellow–deadly fellow.
72 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering First Aid.


Steer clear of the stinging nettle, a
wild plant that grows in many parts
of the United States. This dreadful
plant might attract butterflies, but it
stings like a bee. It can grow to more
than 6 feet tall. Short spines cover
the stem; its leaves are thin and egg-
shaped with a tapered tip, and are
covered on the underside with short
hairs. Its flowers are light green. It is
not poisonous (it’s actually an herb),
but touching the plant releases a very
irritating chemical that causes extreme
discomfort. If you come into contact
with the stinging nettle (also called the
bull nettle), do not scratch the affected
area. You might get temporary relief
by spreading a paste of baking soda
mixed with water over the area, or
apply vitamin A oil directly to the spot.
Poison oak Poison ivy
Poison sumac
ORIENTEERING 73
.Orienteering First Aid


Orienteering Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook; Deck
of First Aid; Emergency First Aid pocket
guide; Be Prepared First Aid Book
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Boga, Steven. Orienteering: The Sport of
Navigating With Map and Compass.
Stackpole Books, 1997.
Bratt, Ian. Orienteering: The Essential
Guide to Equipment and Techniques.
Stackpole Books, 2002.
Ferguson, Charles, and Robert Turbyfill.
Discovering Orienteering: Skills,
Techniques, and Activities. Human
Kinetics, 2013.
Jacobson, Cliff. Basic Illustrated Map
and Compass. Falcon Guides, 2008.
Kjellström, Björn. Be Expert With
Map and Compass: The Complete
Orienteering Handbook. Hungry
Minds/John Wiley & Sons, 2009.
McNeill, Carol, Tom Renfrew, and Jean
Cory-Wright. Teaching Orienteering,
2nd ed. Human Kinetics, 1998.
McNeill, Carol. Orienteering (The Skills
of the Game). Crowood Press, 1996.
Palmer, Peter, ed. The Complete
Orienteering Manual. Crowood
Press, 1998.
Renfrew, Tom. Orienteering. Human
Kinetics, 1996.
Videocassettes
Braggins and Pearson. Trail Orienteering,
21 minutes. A&E Orienteering Inc., 1997.
Cassone, Chris. Orienteering—All
Welcome, 12 minutes. A&E
Orienteering Inc., 1998.
Organizations and Websites
Canadian Orienteering Federation
orienteering.ca
Orienteering USA
P.O. Box 505
Riderwood, MD 21139
orienteeringusa.org
U.S. Geological Survey
12201 Sunrise Valley Drive
Reston, VA 20192
703-648-5953
usgs.gov
74 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering Resources.


Equipment Sources
Army Navy Sales
armynavysales.com
Berman’s Orienteering Supply
23 Fayette St.
Cambridge, MA 02139
617-868-7416
bermansosupply.com
Brunton Outdoor Group
2255 Brunton Court
Riverton, WY 82501
brunton.com
The Compass Store
thecompassstore.com
Orienteering Unlimited Inc.
3 Jan Ridge Road
Somers, NY 10589-3007
914-248-5957
orienteeringunlimited.com
U.S. Geological Survey
Topographic Maps
A local sporting goods store or bookstore
may carry topographic maps of your area.
You can also find local dealers in your
state at the U.S. Geological Survey web-
site, usgs.gov. Or send a postcard to the
National Cartographic Information Center,
507 National Center, 12201 Sunrise Valley
Drive, Reston, VA 20192.
Ask for a free topographic map
index circular of your state. The index
circular is a small map of the state
divided into sections called quadrangles.
Each quadrangle is a separate map. Find
out which quadrangles cover the area in
which you want to orienteer. Order the
map by giving the name of the quadran-
gle and include a money order or check
for payment. Send your order to Branch
Distribution, U.S. Geological Survey, Box
25286, Federal Center, Denver, CO 80225.
ORIENTEERING 75
.Orienteering Resources


Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to Eagle
Scout and longtime Scouter Ralph
Courtney for his continued dedication to
updating the Orienteering merit badge
pamphlet. Thanks to him and also Miki
Snell, Peter Snell, Tatyana Svistun, and
Sergey Svistun for their time, patience,
and technical knowledge in support
of the 2003 edition of the Orienteering
merit badge pamphlet. Special thanks to
Ralph Courtney and to Tatyana Svistun
and Sergey Svistun for their assistance
with many of the maps depicted in
this pamphlet.
Scouting America thanks Ralph
Courtney and also Ed Scott and Brian
Coleman of Orienteering USA for their
assistance with the 2013 update of this
pamphlet; and Dr. James Roberts for
his assistance with the 2022 update. We
appreciate current and former Philmont
Scout Ranch staff members Bryan Hayek,
Mark Anderson, John Celley, Chris
Sawyer, Andrea Watson, and Zach Seeger
for their kind help.
The General Rules for Orienteering
are adapted with permission from
Orienteering: The Sport of Navigating
With Map and Compass, by Steven
Boga, Stackpole Books, 1997. The early
history of orienteering is adapted with
permission from Orienteering: The Sport
of Navigating With Map and Compass,
by Steven Boga, Stackpole Books, 1977,
and from The Complete Orienteering
Manual, by Peter Palmer, ed., The
Crowood Press, 1998.
Thanks to the International
Orienteering Federation for its assistance
with the international control descrip-
tion symbols.
Illustrations are adapted with per-
mission from Be Expert With Map and
Compass, by Bjorn Kjellstrom, Hungry
Minds, 1994, and Mountaineering: The
Freedom of the Hills, 5th ed., by Don
Graydon, ed., The Mountaineers, 1992.
The Sid Richardson Scout Ranch
(East) SR2 orienteering map is reprinted
with permission of the Longhorn
Council, Fort Worth, Texas.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Scouting America has long appreciated a mutual and supportive relation-
ship with Orienteering USA. That collaboration continues today through a
memorandum of understanding between Scouting America and this highly
regarded orienteering organization.
76 ORIENTEERING
Orienteering Resources.


Photo and Illustration Credits
Lisa Ames, University of Georgia,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 70
(brown recluse spider)
Ronald F. Billings, Texas Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 70
(black widow spider)
Longhorn Council, Scouting America,
courtesy—Sid Richardson Scout
Ranch orienteering map used on the
cover, in photographs, and on pages
10, 29, 31, 38, 40–42, and 47
Orienteering USA, courtesy—page 76
USDA Agricultural Resource Service/
Scott Bauer, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 70 (tick)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Luther C.
Goldman, courtesy—page 72
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—
page 52
Wikimedia.org, courtesy—page 73
(poison sumac)
Wikimedia.org/Public Health Image
Library, courtesy—page 71
(copperhead)
Wikimedia.org/John Willson, Savannah
River Ecology Laboratory, courtesy—
page 71 (cottonmouth moccasin)
All other photos and illustrations not
listed above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—cover (taking a
bearing illustrations); all illustrations
on pages 8, 9, 12, 54, and 68
Dan Bryant—pages 5–6 (both)
Darrell Byers—page 7
Brian Payne—pages 46 and 48
Randy Piland—pages 25, 44, and
73 (poison ivy)
ORIENTEERING 77
.Orienteering Resources


Notes


Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.