PIONEERING


PIONEERING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35931
ISBN 978-0-8395-3377-1
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note to the Counselor
This edition of the Pioneering merit badge pamphlet takes an
activity-based approach — Scouts will spend most of their time
applying the pioneering skills they acquire. The prerequisite for
this kind of approach is having all the necessary materials
available, in the quantity needed, well organized, and ready to
use. Therefore, counselors should be thoroughly acquainted with
requirements 3 and 9 and the materials and procedures necessary
for their completion. They should be prepared to provide the
grounds for Scouts to have the kind of fun that comes through
experiencing a well-run presentation of pioneering.
As such, those conducting this merit badge must have the
knowledge and skills put forth in the pamphlet’s contents. The
pamphlet is organized so the information presented follows the
requirements in their given order.
The objective of this merit badge is to have Scouts
experience how the required skills are put into action, so they can
rely upon them to successfully build things with ropes and poles.
This merit badge will give Scouts the wherewithal to use what
they gain throughout their lives as well as share with their units
what they learned and experienced.
As with any good Scouting program, the three “Ps” of good
Scout pioneering are Planning, Preparation, and Presentation
FPO


PIONEERING 3
Note to the Scout
Pioneering is about using what you know and what you have to
make life outdoors easier and to get things done. It has played a
major role in Scouting for over 100 years. Lord Baden-Powell,
Scouting’s founder, said, “Pioneering is practical and character-
building: the two essential ingredients of any program material for
Scouts.” The main reason Scouts do pioneering: It is a lot of fun.
Pioneering is knowing how to use simple materials to build
structures, sometimes referred to as “backwoods engineering.”
Throughout history, people have used ropes, spars, and simple
hardware to build bridges, towers, and shelters. In the early days of
our country, pioneering was used in mining and transportation, to
clear the wilderness, and to build roads and bridges. The same skills
can be used by Scouts to build pioneering projects ranging from a
simple camp gadget to an elaborate gateway or bridge.
Another quote by Baden-Powell: “Pioneering develops initiative
and resourcefulness. Additionally it gives practice in team work and
discipline.” You also get to use or play with what you’ve built.
In all Scouting activities, safety must come first. It follows that
the first requirement for the merit badge includes reviewing safety tips.
Pioneering legend John Thurman said, “There’s only one
activity where it pays to start at the top, and that’s swimming.” That
means before you can build sturdy bridges, dependable rafts,
ingenious camp gadgets, and impressive gateways, you need to start
at the bottom. You must become well acquainted with effective,
time-tested ways to use your materials. As you take each step toward
the completion of this merit badge, you’ll put what you learn into
action so your skills can be applied to completing projects that are
safe and that work the way they’re intended.
Pioneering skills are more than just knots and lashings. You
must also learn how to plan and use teamwork. Principles of physics,
geometry, and math come into play to build pioneering structures.
This pamphlet is geared for a practical, hands-on application.
Pioneering provides the joy of accomplishment that comes when
you’ve built something for yourself or others, whether it’s for a
practical purpose or just something fun to play with.
The projects shown in this pamphlet can be constructed with
materials available during summer camp, at district or council
camping events, and during special sessions with your counselor.
In addition to being a merit badge reference, this pamphlet is
designed to serve as a field guide. It’s filled with how-tos and
suggestions. But when building your pioneering projects, do not rely
solely on this pamphlet. Pioneering is also about relying on one’s
resourcefulness, creativity and ingenuity, along with a healthy dose
of good sense. Happy pioneering!


4 PIONEERING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Pioneering or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.


PIONEERING 5
Unless appropriate measures have been taken, materials should
be brought to the building site, and as always while engaged in
pioneering activities, Scouts should practice the Leave No Trace Seven
Principles and the Outdoor Code.





PIONEERING 7
Contents
Safe Pioneering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Whippings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Rope Tackle. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Pioneering Knots . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Lashings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Rope Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Making Rope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Splicing Rope . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Poles for Pioneering. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Anchors . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Smaller Projects. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Trestles and Walkways . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Larger Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Pioneering Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99


8 PIONEERING
Safe Pioneering.
Safe Pioneering
With the challenges, fun, and rewards of pioneering, there can
be no substitute for smart behavior and common sense. As you
begin your pioneering activities, safety must be your first
consideration.
Always keep in mind the following safety points:
• Before and after each use, check all equipment, ropes,
poles, tools, and hardware to ensure they are in good
working condition.
• All equipment should be treated with respect and used
appropriately for its intended purpose.
• Appoint a safety officer who, along with the rest of
the group, should constantly check the work site to
keep it clean of debris. Equipment should be kept in
an organized fashion before, during, and after its use.
Use flagging tape to mark all guy lines.
• During the construction of a project, only one person
should give instructions and signals.
• There should always be plenty of room between the
person carrying spars and people around them.
• Do not work during rainy or wet conditions. Rope and
spars become slippery; you could lose your footing;
and knots can slip and become unsafe.
• Wear clothing to fit the season and wear work gloves
when necessary. Work smart and do not lift more than
you can handle.
In accordance with the National Camp Accreditation
Program (NCAP), if a pioneering project will have partic-
ipants more than 6 feet above the ground, it first must
be reviewed by the council enterprise risk management
committee. Any project where a Scout’s feet are over 6
feet above the ground must be top-rope belayed.


PIONEERING 9
.Safe Pioneering
• Do not stand on spars resting on the ground. They
can unexpectedly roll and cause injuries.
• When lifting a spar to facilitate the frapping of a
tripod or shear lashing, always ensure the person
working the rope doesn’t injure their fingers.
• Take regular breaks to discuss the work in progress
and ensure everyone understands what is required of
them.
• Use extra care when using heavy mallets to pound in
pioneering stakes.
• For safety, heel in the legs of a structure by setting
them in holes approximately 4 to 6 inches deep.
• If the design calls for a certain size and type of rope
or spar, do not substitute anything of lesser strength.
• Before allowing general use, run a complete test to
see everything is working correctly.
• Continually check all anchors on a pioneering project
as strain is applied during use.
• The number of people using a platform should be
strictly limited to the maximum number established
beforehand and announced by the safety officer.
• There should only be one person on a monkey bridge
at a time.
• Jumping or playing around while on a structure is
unacceptable. Scouts should only climb on board
their project after all lashings are tight, and the
structure has been completely inspected.
• While crossing a monkey bridge, no one should
bounce or purposely swing or sway on the ropes, nor
should anyone race across.
• Those waiting their turn to cross a monkey bridge
must stay off the ropes between the anchors and the
bridge framework.
• Everyone must stay completely off a monkey bridge
whenever the foot and hand ropes are being
tightened or the spanner ropes are being adjusted.
• When the day’s work is complete, untie all knots,
coil all ropes, check all hardware, and store
everything in its proper place.
Managing risk
includes being
prepared to handle
emergencies that
might occur
during pioneering.


Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which means “to lessen
in force or intensity” and “to make less severe.” By taking precautions
to manage risk and the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to
anticipate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about any
incident that might happen while working on pioneering projects.


PIONEERING 11
.Whippings
Whippings
Whipping the ends of all your lashing ropes will give your
ropes good service in the field. Trying to tie knots in ropes
with frayed ends is not only a bother but a waste of
time. Because of the hard usage that ropes get during
pioneering activities, all ropes should be whipped
with either a West Country whipping or a
Sailmaker’s whipping.
The type of whipping cord that you
use is most important. Flax cord that is
waxed and made of six strands is the
best for pioneering work. It’s available
in 600-yard spools, is not that expensive,
wears very well, and is strong, easy to use,
and doesn’t stretch.
Half Knot (West Country) Whipping
The West Country whipping works equally well on any
type of rope, twisted or braided, or rope made from natural
fibers or plastic filament. (All plastic ropes should have the end
melted back first.) The success of this whipping depends on the
tightness of the knots formed by the cord and the interlocking
action of the half knots.
TO MAKE A HALF KNOT (WEST COUNTRY) WHIPPING:
1. On a quarter-inch diameter rope, start with a
14-inch length of waxed flax cord. Wrap the
cord about half to three-quarters of an inch
from the end, and tie a half knot (see
photo 1, next page). If the rope is badly
frayed, pull it together with a clove hitch or
constrictor knot to begin the whipping.
PIONEERING 11


Whippings.
2. Continue by taking the two ends of the whipping cord
around the back of the rope (away from you), and tie
another half knot identical to the first (see photo 2).
3. Keep repeating the half knots, front and back, pulling
each one tight, until the whipping has been formed.
The West Country whipping is finished with a square
knot and the excess cord is trimmed.
Tie each half knot either right over left or left over right so
that the knots lay neatly together and snug against the previous
knot to form a smooth finished whipping.
Sailmaker’s Whipping
Just the thought of sails and ropes flapping in a strong
wind when a sailing ship is under way makes you realize that
the ends of the ropes aboard a ship have to be whipped to keep
them from unraveling under the strain. Sailmaker’s knew that a
little extra effort spent whipping the ends of the ropes would
make their work much easier in the long haul. The reason this
whipping holds up better than any other is that the whipping
cord is actually intertwined with the strands.
TO MAKE A SAILMAKER’S WHIPPING:
1. Unlay the strands about 1 inch and form a bight with
the whipping cord.
2. Slip the bight over one strand and then lay the two
running ends of the cord between the remaining two
strands of the rope as shown in the first photo above.
A good practice
when making any
kind of whipping:
Make the
whipping as long
as the diameter
of the rope.
12 PIONEERING


.Whippings
Keep one end of the whipping cord long, and the
other short.
3. Re-lay the strands of the rope to form the
original twist.
4. Wrap the long end of the whipping cord
tightly around the rope clockwise, moving
toward the end of the rope.
5. Keep each wrap tight against the previous
one and neatly together as shown in the
middle photo above.
6. To complete the whipping, bring the original
bight up over the same strand it was
originally looped over. Then pull the short
end of the whipping cord until the bight is
pulled tight on top of the wrappings.
7. Place the long end of the whipping cord
(the one that did the wrapping)
between the next two strands, to the left
of the first strand, and bring the short end
up, between the same two strands.
8. Join the ends of the whipping cord
with a square knot, pulling it down
tight between the next two strands of
the rope and snug on top of the
wraps.
9. Cut off any excess from the ends of the whipping cord.
Sailmaker’s whipping on 3/4-inch,
3
⁄8-inch, and 1/4-inch manila ropes
PIONEERING 13


Rope Tackle.
Rope Tackle
A rope tackle is applied where the guy lines meet the anchors
for a wide range of pioneering projects. A rope tackle is
effective when you want to pull more than your own strength
will permit. The idea behind a rope tackle is similar to that of a
tackle using blocks and pulleys. In a rope tackle, one end of the
rope has to be anchored around a spar or tied through a ring or
other piece of hardware that doesn’t move. Then a loop knot is
tied along the standing part of the rope forming a fixed loop
that acts as the wheel in a block. A butterfly knot is often the
knot of choice for this job. It can be tied in the standing part of
the rope and is both easy to tie and fairly easy to untie even
after being put under a strain.
1. Start with a butterfly knot in the desired position along the
standing part of the rope.
2. When there is lots of line, make a bight in the running end
and feed it through the butterfly knot’s fixed loop.
3. To tighten the line, grab a hold of the bight and pull it
toward the anchor.
4. When the desired tension is put on the line, with one hand,
keep the line taut, and holding the bight in the other hand,
use the bight to form a half hitch around both tight lines.
14 PIONEERING


PIONEERING 15
.Rope Tackle
5. As the half hitch is secured, maintain the tension on the line
by pinching the standing part, making sure it doesn’t slip.
6. Still maintaining the tension on the tightened lines in the
standing part, cinch the half hitch up close to the fixed
loop of the butterfly knot.
As an added measure, tie another half hitch around the tightened
lines. All excess rope should be coiled under the knots.
PIONEERING USES
• To adjust the strain on the guy lines of a pioneering project
• To adjust the tension on the foot and hand ropes of a
monkey bridge
• To tie down and secure equipment on a trailer or truck
• To hoist or lower equipment
• To tighten hold-down ropes on large tents and flies
For safety reasons, taut-line hitches should never be
used in any pioneering work. If they slip, a pioneering
structure can become unstable.





PIONEERING 17
.Pioneering Knots
Pioneering Knots
Pioneering knots are called upon because of their ability to
perform specific tasks related to building a reliable and safe
project. All basic camping knots and pioneering knots can be
divided into three categories:
Bend: a knot used to join two lengths of rope. In pioneering,
you might encounter situations where there’s a need to join
ropes that are wet, slick, or thick.
Hitch: a knot that attaches a rope to some object, often a ring,
rail, spar, or post.
Loop Knot: a knot used to form a loop that doesn’t slip, either
at the end or in the middle of a line.
The best knots are easy to tie, place a minimum of strain
on a rope’s fibers, and are easy to untie.
Clove Hitch and Half Hitches
“The first and everlasting thing to remember about the clove
hitch is that it is composed of two half hitches.”
—John Thurman, Gilwell Camp Chief
When tied in this manner, the clove hitch is simple and
easy. All you do is tie two similar half hitches, bring them
together, and you have a clove hitch. If this concept is applied


18 PIONEERING
Pioneering Knots.
when completing a common round, shear, tripod, traditional
diagonal, or a version of a square lashing, you’ll find tying a
clove hitch tight against the wraps or fraps is a snap. As the
photos on the previous page show, take the first half hitch and
pull it snug against the fraps, then take the second half hitch
and pull it snug against the first. You have a clove hitch!
Here’s another demo. When proceeding from the right and
moving to the left, the running end can be carried over the top
of the spar, brought down behind the standing part, and then
carried over the standing part. That’s the first half hitch.
For the second half hitch, simply repeat the process next to and
to the left of the first half hitch, tucking the running end under
itself. That’s a clove hitch. An extra half hitch can be added,
and a fourth half hitch can be added, etc.
When proceeding from the left and moving to the right, just
reverse the process.


PIONEERING 19
.Pioneering Knots
Clove Hitch on a Bight
A clove hitch on a bight, (tying a clove hitch over an open-
ended pole) is useful in a variety of circumstances. When
preceding from the left, all that needs to be done is:
1. Form a right underhand loop and place it over the pole.
2. Form another right underhand loop and place it over the
pole (on top of the pervious one).
3. Voila! Clove hitch!
When preceding from the right, instead of right
underhand loops, form left underhand loops. Without
being informed, one can just look at two of these half
hitches and see they look exactly like a clove hitch. Of
course, that’s because these two half hitches are a clove
hitch. Placing two half hitches over the open end of a
vertical pole is the hands down, quickest way for tying a
clove hitch. After you’ve done it for awhile, it takes about
a second. This is exactly what the doctor ordered when
you need to tie a clove hitch over the end of a pole.
It’s also the only way to tie a clove hitch in the
middle of a long line, like when securing a hand rope on
the top of an A-frame during the construction of a Double
A-frame Monkey Bridge (unless you want to pull foot after foot
of rope through the hitches because you’re working with the
end of the rope, or… you just don’t know any better). It’s also
very handy when you’ve got a series of poles driven into the
ground and you want to rope off an area, or, you want to
secure a line to an upright pole at the edge of a tarp.
Butterfly Knot
A butterfly knot is a fixed
loop tied in the middle of
a rope. There are a
number of other knots
that do the same thing,
but the butterfly knot
tends to work better
because it doesn’t jam
when strained and it’s
easy to untie.


20 PIONEERING
Pioneering Knots.
Since it’s tied in a symmetrical fashion, strain can be put on it
from any direction. Though this knot is usually tied in the
middle of the rope, you can also tie it at the end of the line if
you need a fixed loop that is easily untied.
1. Start with an overhand loop. Then twist the rope to form a
second overhand loop. Next drop the upper loop down in
back.
2. When the upper loop is dropped down, pull it under the
two crossed standing parts of the rope. Then pull it up
through the top loops to complete the knot.
3. To pull the knot tight, pull the upper loop while holding
the standing parts of the rope at the bottom.
PIONEERING USES
• When using a rope to pull a heavy object (such as a log),
tie a series of butterfly knots to form loops for each
person’s hand or shoulder.
• To provide a fixed loop to use with a toggle.
• When making a rope tackle, the loop in the butterfly knot
serves as the pulley.
Roundturn With
Two Half Hitches
This is one of the basic knots that is
very reliable for a number of uses in
pioneering work. It is easy to tie and
untie and does not reduce the strength of the
rope when under a hard pull due to sharp turns.
You start by making a roundturn. This provides
extra surface around the spar when chafing


PIONEERING 21
.Pioneering Knots
or slipping might be a problem. Once you’ve made the
roundturn, the rope has a grip on whatever it’s around. The
strain on the rope can then be adjusted before finishing off with
two half hitches. The knot is well suited for both ends of a guy
line.
When it is used in a place where you will not have easy
access, as at the top of a tower, after the two half hitches are
tied, secure the running end with a piece of light cord.
To tie the knot, make a roundturn around a pole. Next, make a
half hitch around the standing part of the rope (as shown on
the left in the photos). Then make another half hitch (as shown
in the middle). When both half hitches are made, pull them
tight (as shown on the right).
PIONEERING USES
• When wear is a factor when tied to an iron ring.
• To attach a guy line to a pole
• For connecting guy lines to the anchor stakes, because it
does not jam and is easy to untie when adjustments are
needed.
Rolling Hitch
As you become more involved in pioneering activities, you will
find that there are many uses for the rolling hitch. After the
roundturn is made, it supplies enough grip for you to complete
the knot with ease, even when the line is under strain. Further
adjustment can be made without completely untying the knot,
by loosening the knot slightly, pulling the rope tight, and
tightening the knot again.
When the rolling hitch is tied to a spar, pull can be exerted
either perpendicular to or along the length of the spar. After
exerting heavy pressure, it will untie easily. When you need


22 PIONEERING
Pioneering Knots.
extra gripping power, just add extra turns. It works well with
slippery or wet rope.
1. Start by laying the running end over the spar.
2. Next, take a turn around the spar.
3. Complete a roundturn and hold the running end up
4. Now cross the running end over the standing part.
5. Take another turn around the spar on the other side.
6. Tuck the running end under the turn and pull it tight.
PIONEERING USES
• When you want to tie a rope to a stake or a spar, the
rolling hitch can be loosened easily to take up slack, and
then retightened
• To attach a light tackle, double the rope over to form a
bight, and tie a rolling hitch with a loop for the tackle.


PIONEERING 23
.Pioneering Knots
• To form a hand or shoulder loop to pull a spar, tie two
rolling hitches, one at each end of a short rope.
Water Knot
What could be more simple than tying two overhand knots to
form a water knot? Its use goes back to fisherman who needed
to tie the ends of two wet fishing lines together. To tie two
ropes together of man-made fiber, it’s a simple knot with little
bulk, and it will not fail. In pioneering, whenever you’re using
ropes made of man-made fibers that are braided and slick and
don’t hold knots well, think of the water knot.
Begin the water knot by tying a loose overhand knot in
the end of one rope, then bring the end of the other rope over
and under the first knot, following the same path in reverse.
PIONEERING USES
• To tie together the ends of two wet or slippery ropes.
• To make a grommet (loop) using all types of rope (braided
or twisted). Keep in mind that once strain is put on the
knot, it will be hard to untie.
• To tie together the ends of halyards.
• To tie the ends of flat nylon webbing to make a grommet
(loop) or sling.
When securing a guy line to a horizontal spar, you can
use a rolling hitch instead of a roundturn with two half
hitches. Strain is applied in the direction of the roundturn.


24 PIONEERING
Pioneering Knots.
Carrick Bend
When you have to tie together the ends of two large ropes (half
inch in diameter or larger), there is no better knot to use
than the carrick bend. While many other knots reduce the
strength of the rope considerably, a carrick bend reduces its
strength only slightly. You’ll find that once a carrick bend is put
under a heavy strain, it’s not all that hard to untie. The knot
will tighten under the strain of the ropes, but won’t slip and
works well with wet or slippery ropes.
The carrick bend looks very symmetrical when it’s first
tied. But, as soon as it’s pulled tight, it looks quite different and
is often hard to identify.
Start by making an underhand loop at the end of one rope
and lay the end of the other rope under the loop (left hand
photo). Then weave the end of the other rope over and under
as you go (as shown in the middle and right hand photos).
When joining large diameter lines that will be put under a
heavy strain, to assure the carrick bend can be easily untied,
the knot can be left in its initial symmetrical form with both
running ends seized securely to their standing parts.
PIONEERING USE
• Joining the ends of two large diameter lines.
When the ends of each
line are pulled tight,
the carrick bend takes
on this collapsed form.
A carrick bend with both ends seized.


PIONEERING 25
.Pioneering Knots
Draw Hitch
This quick-release knot can hold a considerable strain. It’s ideal
for reliably securing a boat to a mooring or a horse to a
hitching post. You can easily release the knot with a simple tug
and quickly be on your way. And all you need is one hand to
do it.
In addition to securing the end of a line to a fixed point,
the draw hitch can be tied in the middle of the line. This results
in two ends of the rope hanging down equally; use it to retrieve
a long rope used as a hauling line to help hoist a tall structure.
1. Place a large bight in the desired part of the line, behind
the spar (left photo below).
2. Form a small bight on the left side, under the spar, and
carry it over the front (middle photo below).
3. Pass this left side bight through the top of the large bight,
and tighten this by pulling up on the left side bight and
down on the right side (right photo below).
4. Next, form a small bight on the right side, under the spar,
and carry it over the front (left photo above).
5. Pass this right side bight through the left side bight (middle
photo above).
6. Tighten this by pulling up on the right side bight and down
on the left side (right photo above). Apply strain by pulling
on the left. Release the knot by pulling on the right.


26 PIONEERING
Pioneering Knots.
PIONEERING USES
• When hoisting a large structure that is not intended for
climbing, e.g. a tall gateway, and the lines you’re using for
lifting and preventing over pulling are not guy lines, tie the
middle of the hoisting ropes to the structure with draw
hitches. Then, when the structure is standing, these lines
can be easily removed with a simple tug on the free end.
• Great for bundling coils of lashing ropes.
Constrictor Knot
In the days when black powder was used for blasting in mining
operations, this was the knot that was tied around the top of
the bag containing the black powder to hold the fuse in
securely—hence, its other common name, the bag knot.
The constrictor is based on the clove hitch, except after the
first half hitch, the running end forms an overhand knot with
the standing part. It’s this extra half-knot that provides
additional hold when the hitch is pulled tight.
1. Make a turn around the spar with the running end, then
cross over the standing part of the rope.
2. Bring the running end under the spar.
3. Cross the running end on the outside of and over the
standing part.
4. Form an overhand knot by passing it underneath the half
hitch.


PIONEERING 27
.Pioneering Knots
To tie a Constrictor Knot in the standing part of the rope
over an open spar:
1. Make a right overhand loop.
2. While holding the left side of the loop, twist down on the
right side counter clockwise making a right underhand
loop.
3. Place this second loop behind the standing part and pass it
under the first loop.
4. Grab hold of both loops and place then over the spar.
5. Pull tight.
PIONEERING USES
• To use interchangeably with a clove hitch, except once the
constrictor knot is pulled tight, it is quite hard to untie.
• To start a lashing. When it’s tied to a vertical spar, the
crossing spar can rest on it while the lashing is being
made.
• To make a good temporary whipping at the cut end of a
rope, or to start the West Country whipping.
• To start a splice, use it to stop off the unlaid strands of the
rope so they won’t unravel further as you’re working the
splice.


The square lashings supporting the
roller bar for this camp seesaw were
started using constrictor knots.


PIONEERING 29
.Lashings
Lashings
Learning the needed skills and becoming familiar with how
things are done is often referred to as knowing the ropes,
necessary before the real fun can begin! We use lashings to
bind two or more poles together to make a structure. Most
lashings commonly consist of a recommended number of
“wraps” around the poles, and then a recommended number of
“fraps” between the poles and around the “wraps.” Depending
upon geographic location and personal preferences, individuals
might use different versions of lashings to get the job done.
Square Lashing
The most common and frequently used lashing is the square
lashing, which gets its name from the fact the wraps are
“square” to the poles. Square lashings bind poles that are in
contact and cross each other at any angle from 45 degrees to 90
degrees. There are various types of square lashings, and when
tied tightly and correctly, they all do the job.
Most commonly used in the pioneering area at National
Jamborees is the Mark II square lashing (aka Japanese Mark II
square lashing, Japanese lashing, square knot square lashing),
which has been widely adopted for simplicity, speed, and
efficiency. It’s easy and quick to tie, working both ends of the
rope at the same time and tying off the fraps with a square knot.
1. Place the poles in the desired position. Fold your lashing
rope in half. Place the midpoint of the rope around the
vertical pole and just under the crossing pole.
2. Now work both ends of the rope at the same time to make
three wraps around the poles.
3. After completing the three wraps, bring the two ends down
between the poles in opposite directions to make two
frapping turns around the wraps.


30 PIONEERING
Lashings.
4. Pull the frapping turns tight, and complete the lashing by
tying the two ends with a square knot. It’s that simple.
Clove Hitch Square Lashing
This long-standing approach works one end of the rope to wrap
and frap—invaluable in those circumstances when only one
hand is available.
1. To join the poles, start with a clove hitch tied on the
vertical pole just below where you want to join the
crossing pole. After the clove hitch is tied, secure it by
wrapping the excess short end of the rope around the
running end.
Straightforward approach for lashing two poles together


PIONEERING 31
.Lashings
2. Make three wraps around the poles, pulling each wrap
tight to join the poles together. Don't overlap the rope.
3. Take two frapping turns around the wraps (between the
poles) to pull the wraps tight. Finish with another clove
hitch on the horizontal pole.
Diagonal Lashing
When putting crossed braces on a structure to keep it from
racking (as used when making a trestle), the most important
lashing is the diagonal lashing. A diagonal lashing is used when
you need to close a gap between
two poles where they cross each
other but do not touch. The
“traditional” diagonal lashing is
tied as follows:
1. Cinch the poles together by
tying a timber hitch where
they cross.
2. Make three wrapping turns
on the opposite diagonal to
the timber hitch. Keep the
wraps parallel to one another
and pull them tight. (Some
prefer to take these first
wrapping turns along the
same diagonal as the timber
hitch.)
3. Make three more tight wraps across the first three, again
keeping them parallel.
4. Take two frapping turns between the poles, tightly around
both sets of wraps and complete the lashing with a clove
hitch around one of the poles.


32 PIONEERING
Lashings.
Round Lashing
The most commonly used
lashing for extending the
length of a pole is the
round lashing. Tie this
lashing with a clove hitch
around both poles followed
by eight to 10 tight wraps
that are flush together, and
end with another clove
hitch around both poles.
There are no frapping
turns. The manner in which this lashing needs to be applied
results in the poles being in a position where they are already
tightly touching. Taking frapping turns between the parallel
poles would only weaken the connection.
The objective is to combine the poles together to make a
longer length that is as rigid as possible. So, connecting two
poles in this fashion definitely requires a good overlap between
them. It also requires two lashings, each tied tightly well near
the ends of each pole where they overlap.
Shear Lashing
Use a shear lashing when two parallel poles are to be opened
out like scissors to make a pair of shear legs. What are shear
legs? Simply put, they’re two upright poles, lashed together at
the tips with the butt ends (bottoms) spread apart to support
some kind of weight. In Scout Pioneering we frequently use
shear legs to form an A-frame.
The fastest and easiest form of this lashing is with “plain
turns” and is tied as follows:


PIONEERING 33
.Lashings
1. Start with a clove hitch around one
pole. (Wrapping the short end (tail)
around the running end will secure
the clove hitch.)
2. Make five to ten wrapping turns around the poles. (The
more wraps you make, the stiffer the lashing will be.)
3. Take two tight fraps around the wraps between the poles.
4. Finish with a clove hitch on the opposite pole, and then
spread the legs as needed.
When the shear lashing will be applied to a
structure that is to be used for a longer period of
time, forming the wraps using racking turns (figure
of eight) provides more contact between the poles
and the rope.


34 PIONEERING
Lashings.
Tripod Lashing
The tripod is the most simple self-standing pioneering structure.
It’s frequently used in the building of camp gadgets. In larger
projects, two tripods can support a crossbar or support two
parallel spars for a platform.
• The tripod lashing with “plain turns” is a simple and quick
way to lash together three poles into a tripod.
• Lay the three poles alongside each other, making sure the
butt ends are lined up evenly, and tie a clove hitch to one
of the outside poles.
• Wrap the rope around the poles six to eight times, laying
the turns of rope neatly alongside one another. (How stiff
the tripod legs will be when they’re separated depends on
the number and tightness of these wrapping turns.)
• Make two tight fraps on either side of the center pole. End
with a clove hitch around an outside pole. Spread the legs
of the tripod into position, crossing the outside poles under
the middle pole.
When a tripod lashing
is used to build a
tripod that will support
excessive weight for a
longer duration,
forming the wraps
using racking turns
(figure of eight)
provides more contact
between the poles and
the rope.


.Lashings
Floor Lashing
With the double floor lashing, the floor poles (floor
spars, decking poles) are attached to each platform
support (stringer) on both sides. When pulled tight,
this lashing makes the floor or platform more secure.
Start by tying a clove hitch around the platform
support and wrap the tail around the long part of the
rope. Next, make a bight in the running end and pass
it over the first floor pole on the inside of the platform
support. Now, grab this bight from below and pass it
underneath the platform support and loop it over the
first floor pole on the outside of the platform support.
Tighten both loops around the first floor pole by
pulling the running end, which is extending out from
the top of the platform floor between the first and
second floor poles.
Repeat the process for each floor pole until you
reach the other end. When you do, tie off the rope to
the platform support with a series of tight half hitches.
A clove hitch is tied around the platform support. Make a bight in the running end and
pass it over the first floor spar on the inside of the platform support. Grab this bight
and pass it underneath the platform support. Now loop it over the first floor spar on
the outside of the platform support.


Lashings.
Before applying the half hitches when lashing a
floor, tighten the whole configuration by taking a
frapping turn around the wraps, between the poles.
36 PIONEERING


PIONEERING 37
.Lashings
Tighten both loops around the first floor spar by pulling the running end extending between the first and
second floor spars on top of the platform floor. Repeat this process for each floor spar until you reach the
other end. Secure the running end of the rope to the other platform support with a tight clove hitch.
Pulling running end to tighten the loops
Passing it under platform supportMaking next bight in running end Working it between two floor spars
Looping bight over floor sparGrabbing bight from underneath





PIONEERING 39
.Rope Information
Rope Information
KNOT-TYING TERMINOLOGY
Before you begin learning new knots, you need to know
some of the basic terms used in knot tying. Become familiar
with these terms and use them as you learn how to tie the
various knots.
Running End and Standing Part: These are two of the
most common terms used in knot tying. The running end is the
end of the rope that is used to tie the knot. This end is
sometimes referred to as the working end. The rest of the rope
is the standing part.
Overhand Loop: An overhand loop is formed when a loop
is made so that the running end of the rope is on top of the
standing part. It can be formed anywhere along the standing
part of the rope.
Underhand Loop: An underhand loop is formed when the
running end of the rope is placed under the standing part.
Bight: A bight is formed by doubling back a length of the
rope against itself to form a U. This can be done near the end
or anywhere along the standing part. Bights can vary from a
few inches to a few feet in length. A bight doesn’t have to have
a sharp bend. It can be “open”. In this case, the running end of
the rope is alongside the standing part of the rope, but is not
crossed over or under (which would form an overhand loop or
an underhand loop).
Take a Turn: The term take a turn means to wrap a rope
around a spar or stake so it continues off in the opposite
direction. The friction this creates will give you a grip on the
stake or spar that will help you hold the strain on the line. It
also gives better control in taking up or letting out a line.


40 PIONEERING
Roundturn: To make a
roundturn, wrap the rope completely
around a pole and bring the running end
back along the standing part of the rope. A
roundturn gives you even more grip in holding the
strain on a line, and is the basis for tying several knots, as
when making a roundturn with two half hitches.
TYPES OF ROPES AND CORDS
The three most important factors to consider when selecting
rope for pioneering use are strength, how much or little it
stretches, and how easily it handles. Other considerations are
how well it resists mildew, its ability to stand up to repeated
wetting and drying, and whether or not it retains kinks from
knots after having been under a hard strain, making it difficult
to use a second time. Depending upon the application for
which they’re used, natural fiber ropes made from materials
found in nature, and synthetic ropes produced from man-made
fibers, each have their own advantages.
Manila: Manila rope should provide the bulk of the rope
needed for your troop’s pioneering kit. (Its cost is mid-range.)
Properly cared for it will give good service for quite a few years.
Pure manila rope is by far the best all-around rope. It’s easy to
handle, has good strength-to-size ratio, and does not have an
objectionable stretch factor. It handles well in three important
pioneering areas: knot tying, lashing, and in using a block and
tackle. Manila rope can be spliced easily and withstands
repeated wetting and drying cycles. Manila rope in quarter-inch
diameter comes in a standard 1200-foot coil, while larger
diameters come in 600-foot coils. Most other types of rope come
in 600-foot spools as a standard package. Shorter lengths are
available from retail suppliers.
Sisal: Sisal rope has much the same appearance as manila
rope, but it’s quite inferior in strength and does not handle well
when used for lashing or knot tying. When sisal rope, tied into
a knot gets wet and then dries, it becomes useless because of
the kinks that remain. Even though it costs less. it is not cost
effective because it breaks down quickly during use, so the cost
is high when compared to other types of rope that can be used
again and again.


PIONEERING 41
..Rope Information
Polypropylene: Rope made of this man-made plastic fiber
should be considered for pioneering activities because it is
lightweight and its strength-to-size ratio is good. Size for size it
is twice as strong as manila rope, but has a little higher stretch
factor. Its strength makes it suitable for anchor strops and for
any application involving heavy strain. Though it stretches
under a hard pull, this should not pose a problem if taken into
consideration beforehand. It is easy to splice in a twisted three-
strand form. Because it is somewhat slippery, four tucks should
be made instead of the usual three tucks. Cut ends should be
both melted back and whipped with a good flax cord. A
disadvantage of polypropylene is that long exposure to sunlight
has a weakening effect on the fibers. But, all things considered
it is worth including in your pioneering supplies.
Nylon: The most prevalent disadvantage of nylon rope is
that it has a 20 percent stretch factor. But, in cases where the
stretch factor can be taken up with adjustment to the strain on
the line, its strength can be an advantage. Nylon rope also has
a tendency to slip when a hard pull is put on some knots.
Because of these two factors, it is almost useless as a lashing
rope.
Parachute Cord: This popular cordage is very strong for
its size. It’s abrasion and mildew resistant, easy to use, and
available in different colors. But, it’s also designed to stretch.
This makes it fine to use in building most camp gadgets, but
not advisable to use when building pioneering structures that
need to bear lots of weight and withstand plenty of strain.
Polyester: This man-made fiber rope is usually seen in the
braided form. It handles well, is strong, and its stretch factor is
less than nylon. It costs more than manila or nylon, but some
sizes and lengths could be used in pioneering activities on a
selected basis. A 6-foot length of quarter-inch diameter
polyester rope makes an excellent rope for practicing knot tying.
Polyethylene: This is the cheapest of man-made fiber
ropes. It is most often seen in braided form and has a
distinctive shine. Don’t let the low cost lure you into buying
any quantity of polyethylene for pioneering or camp use. It is
not suited for either knot tying or lashing because it holds kinks
after being under a strain.


42 PIONEERING
.Rope Information.
Cotton: Cotton rope in both twisted and braided forms is
outclassed in strength by other types and today there is little
use for it in pioneering and camping.
Binder Twine: Binder twine is made from loosely twisted
jute fibers that are treated with oil during manufacturing. Its
principle use today is for tying bales of hay as the baling
machine compresses the hay. Binder twine is readily available
in varying quantities at hardware and farm supply stores. Its
low cost makes it a throwaway item after use. But don’t be too
quick to toss it in the trash—a balled up handful of discarded
twine makes a good fire starter in camp. Here are some uses:
• When pioneering projects call for the use of poles less
than 2 inches in diameter, it can be used for lashing.
(Do not use binder twine as a replacement for quarter-
inch rope in general pioneering use or lashings.)
• Use it to make a simple strop lashing with six or eight
wraps and a square knot.
• Two strands of binder twine quickly twisted together
will equal a light cord.
• Use it for the back stays of anchor stakes.
• Use it for the construction of light camp gadgets.
BREAKING STRENGTH VS. SAFE WORKING LOAD
It’s important to note that the breaking strength of a rope is not
the measure for gauging how much strain the rope can
withstand during use. Instead, use the safe working load as the
measure, which takes into account the conditions and variables
that exist during performance.
PREPARING MANILA LASHING ROPES
1. Obtain the quantity of pure quarter-inch manila rope
that will provide enough lashing ropes to complete the
project(s) you want to build.
2. New rope needs to be stretched before it is fit for use.
Tie each end of a long length securely to a fixed object
like a post or tree. Grab the mid point with both hands
and pull back. Take up the slack and repeat the
process one time.


PIONEERING 43
..Rope Information
3. Cut lengths of rope in the
size(s) needed for the projects
you will be building. Many
camp gadgets can be
completed using 6 and 10-foot
lengths of quarter-inch
manila. Generally speaking,
depending on the diameter of
the spars, 15-foot lashing
ropes will be the most
commonly used length for
most Scout pioneering
projects.
4. Whip both ends of each
lashing rope. (For pioneering,
the West Country or
Sailmaker’s whipping will
prove to be the most
dependable.)
5. Color code each rope by size,
by dipping the ends with a
dab of paint. A widely used
system is in the chart below.
6. Bundle groups of the same-length lashing ropes in
coils and tie them together with a 3-foot cord.
Color Coding Coils
Use this common coding system to make it easy to
grab the proper length of rope. Just dip the ends of
the rope with a little paint.
Green 6 feet
White 10 feet
Red 15 feet
Blue 20 feet
Black 30 feet
Silver 40 feet
Yellow 50 feet


44 PIONEERING
.Rope Information.
CARE OF ROPE
Always dry out any wet rope before putting it away. Store
it in a dry place. Never hank natural fiber rope as this will
cause kinks. Make large coils and bind them together with
either a clove hitch or draw hitch. Color-coded coils of the
same size lashing ropes can be combined and bound together
for easier storage and access. Before using ropes for any
project that will bear weight, separate the strands along the
length of the rope and check the fibers for wear and rot.
Replace any worn out lines.
COILING AND THROWING A ROPE
You might never be called upon to throw a line to someone in
distress; however, it’s always good to be
prepared. In addition, many pioneering
activities call for coiling and throwing a line
to get it across a creek or ditch, or up and
over a high tree branch. How you make the
coil is very important. To learn how to coil
and throw a length of rope. select a 40-foot
length of one-quarter- to three-eighths-inch
manila rope. Make sure both ends are
whipped.
Coiling the Rope: If you are right-
handed, coil the line into your left hand. If
you are left-handed, coil the line in your
right hand. As you loop the rope over your
hand, make each successive coil a little
smaller than the one before. This is
important to keep the coils from fouling as
they pay out when thrown.
Preparing to Throw the Rope: To coil
the rope, first secure one end of the line to
your belt or loosely around your wrist. Now
transfer approximately two-thirds of the coils
from your non-throwing hand to your
throwing hand. Next, drop one of the loops
from your non-throwing hand to allow
enough rope for a free swing between your
hands. Hold your non-throwing hand out so that those coils
will peel off smoothly.


PIONEERING 45
..Rope Information
If for any reason you
may need to get rid of the
end of the rope without
becoming entangled in it,
before coiling, tie the end
to a fixed object or have a
partner hold on to it.
Throwing the Rope:
To throw the rope, swing
the coils in your throwing
hand in an arc, much like
you pitch a softball. After
making two or three
“warm-up” swings, release
the rope. A little practice
will help you determine
where your release point
should be to get the most
distance. As the rope is
released, the weight of the
rope will pull the coils from
your non-throwing hand until the entire rope extends out in a
straight line from where you’re standing.
Applying a weight to the end of a light line will make it
easier to throw. A sock or small stuff sack filled with sand and
attached with a clove hitch works well.
Lashing ropes, stored safely and conveniently. Note the color-
coded tips representing each rope's length.


46 PIONEERING
Making Rope.
Making Rope
For ages man has twisted natural fibers from plants to form
cordage. Making rope out of plant fibers is still done today in
remote parts of the world. In many cases people make their
own rope because money is in short supply and the native
plants that have the needed fibers are in great abundance. As
early as 1200 A.D. the Papago Indians of the American
Southwest made rope from cactus fibers using a twirling stick.
The technique can still be used today.
Throughout history, a variety of rope making devices and
machines have been used to make rope. One such device is the
Indian Rope Spinner. The internet is filled with information
about this and other rope making machines.
The basic process of making rope consists of twisting fibers
to form yarns. Then yarns are twisted together to form strands.
Finally, several strands are twisted to form the rope. For exam-
ple, to make quarter-inch diameter rope, binder twine can serve
as the yarns. Three of these binder twine yarns are twisted to
form a single strand. Then three strands are twisted to form
rope approximately quarter inch in diameter.
You can make your own length of quarter inch diameter
rope using simple binder twine. The twine itself is made up of


PIONEERING 47
.Making Rope.
separate fibers that have been twisted together and will serve as
the yarns. These yarns can be twisted into strands, and the
strands into rope. Here’s how you can very simply make a rope
about 6 feet long:
• Cut a 60-foot length of binder twine and divide it into three
20-foot lengths.
• Attach each to a stick or connect to a rope-making device
and twist these three 20-foot lengths together, clockwise, to
form a strand.
• Take the long strand you made and fold it into three parts
to make three shorter strands each about 7 feet long.
• Now twist these three strands together, counter clockwise.
Whip both ends to keep it from unraveling
Making rope using a well-designed rope spinner at the National Jamboree.


A mock cell tower built
at the National Jamboree
using bamboo.


PIONEERING 49
.Splicing Rope.
Splicing Rope
Making the proper splices in the proper places on your ropes is
the benchmark of a skilled craftsman. Very often, the ability to
do a neat job of splicing is placed on the top of the skills list of
ropework. Making splices is not really all that hard to do.
There are three basic types of splices that are typically
made on three-strand twisted rope: an eye splice, a back
splice, and a short splice. The process in all three splices is to
unlay the strands at the end of the rope, then weave them over
and under back into the rope to form the splice.
In some cases the right knot could do the same job as each
of these three splices: a bowline might be used instead of an
eye splice; a sheet bend or carrick bend instead of a short
splice, and whipping could replace the back splice.
Knots are more bulky than an eye splice or short splice.
Splices are neater and smaller and not likely to come untied in
use. Splices in ropes make the rope secure and ready to go
when needed.
Learning how to make the first tuck on each of the three
strands is the key to splicing. The first tuck sets up the pattern
for the following tucks and gives the splice a symmetrical
appearance. Those first few tucks that you make might look a
bit rough, but try to remember that neatness is one of the
keys to a well-made splice. Try to prevent each strand
from unraveling while you’re working with it.
Also, you should try to pull each set of
tucks tight and with even tension.
An eye splice on both ends of a
short half-inch manila rope sling.


50 PIONEERING
.Splicing Rope..
The rope should maintain approximately 80 percent of its
strength if the splice is made with a series of three tucks on
each of the three strands. If after making the first three tucks on
all three strands, you reduce each strand to half of its fibers and
make a fourth tuck, the splice will have a nice tapered look.
To learn the technique of splicing, it’s best to practice
with a short piece of quarter-inch three-strand manila rope.
Avoid sisal and plastic rope until you have mastered splicing
with manila rope.
EYE SPLICE
The eye splice creates a fixed loop at the end of the rope. These
are some of the uses for an eye splice:
• Splice a fixed loop onto the end of a guy line.
• Splice a fixed loop with a thimble in a 10-foot rope to form
a strop.
• Splice a rope into an eyebolt at the bow of a canoe.
• Splice a rope into a tent or fly grommet.
• Splice the throwing line into a ring buoy at the waterfront.
• Splice the line into the block of a block and tackle.
• Put eye splices into each end of a rope to be used as a sling.
Unlay more than enough strands for tucking.
With a piece of string or some tape,
temporarily whip the ends of the
strands and the part of the
rope where they were
separated. (See the
constrictor knot on
page 26.)
Even the best photos of steps for making a splice
can look confusing. The best way to learn how to
splice is to sit down one-on-one with someone
who is familiar with the techniques and go over
each step a few times until you get used to how
the strands are woven together. Splicing is not
one of those skills that you can do once and then
never forget how to do it. It takes a lot of practice.
Eye splice


PIONEERING 51
..Splicing Rope.
How To Create an Eye Splice
1. Lay the strands out so there’s one on the left, one in the
middle and one on the right.
2. Take the middle strand and tuck it under a strand at the
proper distance to form the size eye you want.
3. With the strand on the left, go over the strand you just
went under, and under the strand behind it.
4. Turn the splice over and tuck in the last strand so that it
exits where the middle strand entered. All strands should be
coming out evenly at the same position around the rope.
5. Continue to tuck in each strand, over and under, for a total
of three times for natural fiber rope, and four times for
synthetic rope.
BACK SPLICE
The back splice is made to prevent the end of the rope from
unraveling. It can be used instead of making a whipping. Of the
three splices shown here, the back splice is the least
used because its bulk at the working end of the
rope makes tying some knots more difficult. Back splice


52 PIONEERING
.Splicing Rope..
How To Create a Back Splice
1. Unlay more than sufficient to make the splice and spread
the strands evenly. With pieces of string or some tape,
temporarily whip the ends of each strand.
2. Make a crown knot by bending each end over its neighbor
in turn, going the same way round as the lay of the rope.
3. Pull the crown knot into shape.
4. Tighten it on top of the rope.
5. Tuck each end in turn over the adjoining main strand and
under the next. Draw tight close up to the crown knot.
6. Continue over and under one in turn at least three times.
7. Draw tight after each round of tucks.
SHORT SPLICE
A short splice can be used in place of a knot to join two ropes
or the ends of the same rope together. If two ropes are being
joined with a short splice, they should be the same type of rope
and have the same diameter. Some uses for a short splice:
• Splice the ends of a long line that has been cut, or when a
frayed or unsafe portion needs to be cut out.
• Splice the ends of a short length of rope to form a rope
grommet.


..Splicing Rope.
How To Create a Short Splice
1. Unlay the ropes, intertwine the strands, and tie a
temporary whipping to hold the ropes together. With pieces
of string or some tape, temporarily whip the ends of each
strand to keep them from unraveling, (See the constrictor
knot on page 26.)
2. Starting with one strand (blue) of the left rope, take it over
one of the strands on the right rope, and tuck it under the
next strand on the right.
3. Roll the rope toward you and take the next strand (white).
Carry it over the strand on the right rope, and tuck it under
the next strand.
4. Roll the rope toward you again and take the third strand
(green). Carry it over the next strand on the right rope, and
under the one after.
5. At this point, three strands of the left rope should be
tucked under three strands on the right rope. Continue by
making another tuck with each strand.
6. Continue the process until three tucks have been made
with each strand. Remove the temporary whipping and
splice the other ends in the same way.
Short splice on a
rope grommet


Bamboo grows very
thickly in a variety of
locations across the
United States.


Poles For
Pioneering
Wooden poles are the main
ingredients in building a pioneering
structure. Everyone knows what a pole
is. Depending on the project at hand,
we use them in all different lengths and
diameters.
What Is a Spar?
Simply stated, in pioneering, a spar is a
thick, strong pole. Obviously, a pioneering
project has to be able to withstand the
strain and stress that will occur while
performing its intended function. We cannot
build a structure out of spindly sticks tied
together with string and expect it to work. We
use spars lashed together with good, natural
fiber rope! Here’s what you should know:
• The best spars for pioneering are straight
with a minimum of taper.
• The diameter of a spar is measured at the
butt end, not the tip. Depending on what’s
being built, the butt ends of spars are
generally between two and four inches thick.
• Spars can be any length, depending on what
is being built. In Scout Pioneering, the most
common sizes are 6, 8, 10, and 12 feet, and
sometimes 14 feet, 16 feet and even longer.
.Poles For Pioneering
PIONEERING 55
Scout staves


56 PIONEERING
Poles For Pioneering.
• For pioneering projects, spars should be skinned. If the
bark moves when the project is under strain, lashings can
slip. Also, skinned spars last longer, and the projects look
nicer.
• Spars should be stored out of the weather and regularly
inspected for soundness.
Is a Scout Stave a Spar?
No. By themselves, they’re too skinny. Scout staves (hiking
staffs) are great for instruction and small projects, but a 5-foot
Scout stave is a strong stick, not a spar. Many camp gadgets
can be built using these short, smaller diameter poles.
About Scout Staves
The Scout staff (plural “staves”) hails back from the days of
Baden Powell when it was even considered part of the Scout
uniform. There are many uses for the Scout staff, and these
are in addition to its use in making camp gadgets. With Scout
staves, we can combine the Leave No Trace Seven Principles
and the Outdoor Code with a timeless Scouting tradition.
Carry them on outings and put them to good use to improve
your campsite!
What About Bamboo?
Depending on its condition, large diameter bamboo is very
strong. However it should be born in mind, bamboo can
withstand vertical stress much better than horizontal stress.
It’s fine for a variety of pioneering uses because it grows so
straight, and for its size it’s very lightweight. Due to its slick
surface, lashing bamboo poles together can often present
additional challenges.
Where To Get Poles
Stands of trees with the right characteristics grow in numerous
locations. Get permission from the land owners and perform a
conservation project! Under most conditions, thinning out the
land encourages a healthier tree population. But, get
permission and be prudent. Each spar is a prize and with the
proper care will last for several years of repeated use.


PIONEERING 57
.Poles For Pioneering
A “spar barn”





PIONEERING 59
.Anchors
Anchors
Any pioneering project that cannot safely stand by itself needs
to be anchored. Sometimes nature will provide a tree or rock in
just the right location, or you might be able to shift the project’s
placement to take advantage of a natural anchor. At all other
times, anchors need to be built to assure the structure’s stability.
Stakes
Anchors can be built using strong pioneering stakes. The
common size of stakes for most Scout pioneering projects is 21/2
inches in diameter and about 24 to 30 inches long. After cutting
the stake to this size, cut a point on one end. It’s good to bevel
the top edge to minimize mushrooming or splitting when the
stake is driven into the ground. Long-lasting pioneering stakes
are made of hardwood, such as oak or hickory.
Drive the stakes into the ground at about a 20-degree
angle. Soil conditions can vary and will dictate how large and
long a stake you need. The main thing is to make sure all
stakes are deep enough so they don’t wobble or budge at all.
Tent pegs should
never be used for
pioneering stakes.
They’re neither
long enough nor
strong enough
to make a
safe anchor.


60 PIONEERING
Anchors.
Mallet
When driving stakes into the ground, it’s best to use a wooden
mallet. Using a metal sledge hammer can more easily damage
the stake. To make a mallet, cut a 4-inch diameter piece of
hardwood, such as hickory, elm, or sycamore, to about 11
inches in length. It should weigh about four pounds. Drill a 11
⁄8
inch diameter hole to mount the handle. The handle can be
made from a 24 inch length of hardwood (similar to making a
stake). Use a knife or ax to round the end of the handle to fit
the hole in the mallet head. Secure the handle in place with a
wedge placed crosswise to the length of the head.
Guy Lines
When attaching a guy line, make sure its contact with the stake
is as low to the ground as possible. If the guy line is placed or
slips higher on the stake, there will probably be enough
leverage to pull the stake loose. Guy lines should be secured to
the structure about three-quarters of the way up. To
determine how long a guy line should be, measure the
height at the point where its attached and double that
distance. That’s how far away the anchor should be
from the pole. For example, if the guy line is attached
10 feet up the pole, the anchor should be a minimum
of 20 feet from the base.
3-2-1 Anchor
A 3-2-1 anchor is made by driving stakes in a series:
three stakes, then two stakes, and then one stake to
form the anchor. First drive in the set of three stakes.
Next drive in the set of two stakes about 24 inches
away from the first set. Finally, drive a single stake in
the ground about 12 inches from the two-stake set.
Connect the stakes by tying a rope from the top of
the three-stake set to the bottom of the two-stake set,
and from the top of the two-stake set to the bottom of
the single stake. Use at least two loops of quarter-inch manila
rope, or six to eight loops of binder twine. Twist the rope tight
using a small stick as a lever. After the rope is tight, push the
end of the stick in the ground to keep it from unwinding.
Depending on the strain the anchors need to withstand,
you can use other configurations, such as 2-1-1, or 1-1-1, or
even 1-1 for a light strain.
3-2-1 anchor


PIONEERING 61
.Anchors
Log-and-Stake Anchor
This type of anchor is easy to make and can hold a
considerable amount of pull. You can tie the line directly to the
log, or you can use a ring with a rope grommet as shown in the
photo below. To
make the log-and-
stake anchor,
place a log 4 to 6
inches in
diameter
perpendicular to
the pull of the
line. Then drive
in four large
stakes in front of
the log. Next, slip
the rope grommet
through the ring
and then slip the
ends of the
grommet around the log. Drive a second row of stakes 24
inches behind the front stakes. Then anchor the front stakes to
the rear stakes with a tourniquet made of binder twine or rope.
Rope Grommets
Rope grommets are useful when attaching a long line to an
anchor of stakes. A large grommet can be made by splicing
together the ends of a 10-foot length of half-inch polypropylene
or manila rope. If you don’t have a spliced grommet in your
pioneering kit, tie the ends of the rope with a carrick bend. Be
sure to secure the ends. The grommet you use must be made of
a rope with a higher safe working load than the lines they’re
connecting, to avoid creating a weak link in the chain between
the structure and the anchor.
Strops
When attaching lines to a natural anchor such as a tree
or large rock, a strop can be used very effectively.
Splice a thimble with a large ring to a 10-15-foot
length of half-inch diameter manila or polypropylene
rope. A piece of canvas or burlap should be used to
protect the rope from sharp edges of a rock or to
protect the bark of the tree from rope burns.
Log-and-stake anchor





PIONEERING 63
.Smaller Projects
Smaller Projects
Scouting’s founder Lord Baden-Powell said, “My ideal camp is
where everyone is cheery and busy, where the patrols are kept
intact under all circumstances, and where every patrol leader
and Scout takes a genuine pride in his camp and his gadgets.”
Camp gadgets are smaller pioneering projects that serve a
useful purpose around camp. They normally improve the
campsite by adding convenience, and generally make a campsite
feel more like a home away from home. There are numerous
designs and ideas, several of which are featured on the Scout
Pioneering website (scoutpioneering.com) containing links to
suggested materials, procedures, and photo illustrations.
The projects listed in requirement 3 were selected because
they provide a practical opportunity to put into practice the
knots and lashings presented in this merit badge program. Each
one also has practical uses during troop outings.
Dishwashing rack Clothes-drying rack


64 PIONEERING
Smaller Projects.
Tripod Hand Wash Station
This wash station is sturdy, portable, and very useful when
camping away from washroom facilities. Its design is a sound
example of Scout engineering. Each of the three legs making up
the tripod gets a lashed on support piece, and the wash station’s
stability stems from the fact the design contains three triangles.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
o 2 2-foot sticks (3/4 inch to an inch
diameter) for the leg braces
o 2 4-foot sticks (3/4 inch to an inch
diameter) for the back leg and crossbar
o two 5-foot sticks (3/4 inch to an inch
diameter) for the front legs
For the lashings, you’ll need binder twine, or:
o 1 10-foot lashing rope for the tripod
lashing
o 6 6-foot lashing ropes for the square
lashings
You’ll also need:
o bar of soap in a sock
o small to medium-sized towel
o 2 3-foot cords
o No. 10 can with a bail or 4-quart
cooking pot with a bail
WHAT YOU’LL DO
Make the tripod. Using the 10-foot rope, lash the two 5-foot
sticks and one 4-foot stick together with a tight tripod lashing.
The 4-foot stick should be in the middle. Make sure the butt
ends of all three sticks are even. Separate the legs and set the
tripod up. This project’s success relies on a secure, well-tied
tripod lashing.
Lash on the braces. Using the 6-foot ropes lash one end of
the 2-foot sticks to the 5-foot legs and the other end of the
2-foot sticks to the 4-foot leg, with four tight square lashings.


PIONEERING 65
.Smaller Projects
Lash on the crossbar. Using two more square lashings, tightly
lash the other 4-foot stick to the top extended sections of the
two 5-foot sticks to make a cross bar to hang the towel and
soap-in-a-sock.
Add the soap, water, and towel. With clove hitches, tie the
end of one 3-foot cord to the soap-in-a-sock and the end of the
other 3-foot cord to the towel, and suspend them on either side
of the 4-foot crossbar.
Hang the can filled with water to the end of the 4-foot stick
extending from the front of the tripod.
During the outing, make sure the soap-in-a-sock is not left
inside the can after use, and frequently change the water. One
nice thing about using a metal container is that in cold weather,
the can of water can be heated over a fire or on a stove.


66 PIONEERING
Smaller Projects.
15-Foot Scout Stave Flagpole
Flying flags high is great for Scout spirit, and making a flagpole
is really easy. For a simple 15-foot flagpole, here’s all you’ll
need:
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
o 4 5-foot Scout staves
o 6 6-foot lashing ropes
o 3 20-foot guy lines
o 3 sturdy stakes
o 1 small mallet
o 1 flag with grommets and two short cords to tie it on
WHAT YOU’LL DO
Lash the staves together. Lay out
the Scout staves so they overlap one
another about 10 inches. Join them
with six tight round lashings.
Attach the guy lines. With either
rolling hitches or roundturns with
two half hitches, tie on the guy
lines about three quarters of the
way up to the top of the pole.
Hammer in the stakes. About
seven to eight feet from where the
pole will stand, hammer in each
stake at a 20-degree angle, forming
an equilateral triangle.
Attach the flag. Spacing it so the
top and bottom edge are stretched
onto the top stave, tie on the flag.
Raise and secure the flagpole.
Taking turns, one Scout holds the
pole up as the other attaches a guy
line to each stake to hold the pole
in a vertical position with a rope
tackle.


PIONEERING 67
.
Simple Camp Table
This small table is functional
and provides a convenient
raised surface for personal or
patrol use. Its design is simple
and it sets up quickly.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
o 4 Scout staves for the A-frame legs
o 2 sturdy sticks, about 2 to 3 feet long, to join the legs
and support the platform
o 6 61/2-foot lashing ropes
o 1 20-foot rope to secure the table
o 2 sturdy stakes
o mallet
o 12 5-foot Scout staves or similar poles for the platform
o binder twine
WHAT YOU’LL DO
Make the A-frames. Lash the top of each pair of legs with a
shear lashing, and lash on the 21/2- to 3-foot cross piece with
tight square lashings. Lash on each cross piece at the same
place on each of the legs, about 21/2 feet up from the bottom.
Hammer the stakes. Lay a stave where the table will stand.
On each side of the stave, about 5 feet out, hammer in a sturdy
stake at a 20-degree angle, with the notch facing to the outside.
Get ready to stand up the A-frames. Halve the 20-foot rope.
About 2 feet from the middle, tie a clove hitch on a bight over
the top of one pole of each A-frame. (The A-frames will stand
about 4 feet apart. With the staves between the A-frames, about
6 inches of the staves will extend out from each side.)
Stand up the A-frames. Attach each end of the 20-foot rope to
a stake with a rope tackle, then pull each A-frame upright. The
clove hitches will hold the A-frames in a tight, stable position.
Lash on the table top. Lay the 5-foot staves between the 21/2-
to 3-foot cross pieces and use the binder twine to attach them
on each side with a floor lashing.


Scouts pose on a sturdy 4
x 4 climbing tower built
using two trestles.


PIONEERING 69
.Trestles and Walkways
Trestles and Walkways
Building a Trestle
A trestle is the basic component for building a variety of
bridges. It’s used to support the walkways.
The most basic and most often-used form of a trestle consists of
two legs, two ledgers, and two cross braces. When building a
bridge, the top ledger is also called a transom. This is the part
that supports the walkways. To make a trestle, the two ledgers
are lashed near the top and bottom of the legs and the cross
braces are added, lashing them to the legs.
All together, a trestle is composed of nine lashings. Eight of
them are square lashings and one is a diagonal lashing, which
is used to lash the two cross braces together where they cross in
the center. This cross brace, or X-brace, forms four triangles
contributing to the trestle’s overall structural integrity.
LEGS
When setting out to build the trestle, choose the two spars for
legs first. These spars can be most any length, depending on the
type and height of the structure you’re building. Lay the two
legs on the ground with the two butt ends of the spars at the
same end and even with one another. Then add the ledgers.
LEDGERS
The ledgers are spars that are typically 2 inches to 21/2 inches in
diameter. The position of the ledgers on the legs will depend on
the structure you’re building. There are a couple of general rules
to keep in mind:
• Always keep the butt ends of the legs even with each other.
The overall shape
of the trestle is an
engineered
structure that is
able to support
quite a bit of
weight with
relatively small
diameter spars
for legs.


70 PIONEERING
Trestles and Walkways.
• Except in the case where the tops of two trestles will be
interlocked, always keep the legs parallel as you’re lashing
on the ledgers.
• All lashings should be tightly tied, and when building a
bridge, make sure the larger, top ledger (transom) is tied
most tightly.
CROSS BRACES
Next, the cross braces are added. The cross braces are spars that
are usually 2 inches in diameter. They are lashed to the legs in a
particular sequence:
1. Flip the trestle over and work on the opposite side from the
ledgers.
2. Lash one cross brace to the back side of both legs.
3. Lash the bottom end of the second cross brace on the same
side as both ends of the first cross brace.
4. Lash the other end on the front side—the side with the
ledgers. This is done so that the cross braces are standing
slightly apart. There will be a gap where they cross at the
center.


.Trestles and Walkways
After the ends of the ledgers and the cross braces are lashed to
the legs, stand the trestle up on end. Adjust the trestle so the
legs are parallel. Also check to see that the top ledger is parallel
to the ground. If it is not, lower the trestle, untie the lashing,
and adjust it.
DIAGONAL LASHING
When the legs are parallel and the top ledger is parallel to the
ground, you’re ready to tie the diagonal lashing to the cross
braces while the trestle is standing upright. This lashing is very
important to the strength of the trestle. Along with springing the
two cross braces together, the diagonal lashing creates triangles
that are important to stiffen the arrangement of the spars and to
keep the trestle from racking.
Building Walkways and Bridges
Bridges are very popular pioneering projects. Essentially, a
bridge consists of one or more trestles that support some sort of
walkway. In the case of a monkey bridge, the walkway is just a
rope that you walk on. But for many other
bridges, you can build a walkway from spars
that’s easier to walk on than is a monkey
bridge.
To make a 10-foot section of walkway, select
two spars with a butt diameter of 31/2 inches.
These spars should be matched in the
amount of sag they have when you stand on
them with the ends supported above the
ground. If one spar sags more than the other,
it will make the walkway slant from side to
side and hard to walk on.
PIONEERING 71


72 PIONEERING
Trestles and Walkways.
CROSS SPARS
The cross spars for the walkway should be approximately 2 to
21/2 inches in diameter and 3 feet long. You will need two
additional cross spars that are 31/2 feet long for each walkway
section. (The longer spars go at each end of the walkway.) All
of the cross spars can be lashed to the lateral spars with
quarter-inch manila. Since the lashing is made only to hold the
cross spars in position and not support weight, you can use a
double strand of binder twine. If you use binder twine, double
it over and twist it a few times before you start the lashing.
Make sure you have enough to complete the full lashing with
the doubled-over binder twine. Don’t finish the lashing with
only one strand if you run short. Instead, tie on more binder
twine to complete the lashing. Each of the cross spars is lashed
to the lateral spars with a square lashing, making three wraps
and two fraps.
There are two ways to approach lashing on the cross spars. If
you are going to add a plank over the top of the cross spars,
you will need a total of eight cross spars for each walkway. That
is, six 3-foot long cross spars, and two 31/2-foot long cross spars.
Start by lashing one of the
31/2-foot long cross spars
about 6 inches from the
butt end of the lateral
spars. Place this spar on
top of the lateral spars so
that the ends of the cross
spar extend 3 to 4 inches
out over both sides of the
lateral spars. This
additional length hanging
out is used to lash the
cross spar to the stakes,
which anchors the ends of
the walkway in place.
After the first cross spar is
lashed in place, add six
more 3-foot cross spars
every 16 to 18 inches
down the length of the
lateral spars. The last cross
A strop lashing is
easy to tie. Halve
the rope, place
the midpoint
behind what
you’re lashing,
wrap both ends
around the spars
a few times and
finish with a
square knot.


PIONEERING 73
.Trestles and Walkways
spar should be lashed about 12
inches from the ends of the lateral
spars to allow room for the
“underspar.”
UNDERSPAR
An important feature of this type
of walkway is to lash one 31/2-foot
cross spar to the underside of the
lateral spars, 6 inches from the
end. When the two walkway
sections are placed on the
trestle(s) to form the bridge, these
under spars should contact the
transom of the trestle(s). Then the
three spars [two underspars on the
two walkways and the transom
spar of the trestle(s)] are lashed
together at three points using a
strop lashing.
WALKWAY PLANK
Before lashing the walkway to the
trestle, the walkway plank should
be lashed in at least three places
with square lashings. If you are
going to walk directly on the cross
spars (with no plank on top), you
will need enough cross spars to
make a safe walkway, one that
your foot cannot slip through.
Start making the walkway as
described before by lashing a 31/2-
foot cross spar at the butt end of
the lateral spars. Then lash the
3-foot cross spars about 3 inches
apart, using as many cross spars
as necessary to go the entire length
of the walkway, ending about 1
foot from the other end. Finally,
add the 31/2-foot long underspar.


74 PIONEERING
Trestles and Walkways.
ANCHORING THE WALKWAY
After the walkway is assembled, the butt ends are placed on the
bank of the creek or ravine. This end is anchored in place by
driving stakes in the outside corners formed by the lateral spars
and the first (31/2-foot) cross spar. Lash this cross spar of the
walkway to the stakes with a strop lashing. When the walkways
are lashed to the stakes and to the trestle(s), all the walkway
sections become joined to form a single unit that is very strong.
While the above text describes how to make 10-foot walkways,
you can make 8 or 12-foot sections the same way. If you use the
longer walkways, be sure to test the strength of the lateral spars
before lashing them into a walkway that could be unsafe.
Joining the underspars of the walkways to the trestle’s transom
If you put together a pioneering kit, take some
time to save the matched lateral spars to be used
only for walkways.








PIONEERING 77
.Larger Projects
Larger Projects
Double A-Frame Monkey Bridge
The traditional monkey bridge is perhaps the most familiar of
all Scout pioneering projects. It’s frequently featured at expos,
camporees, and camps, and is often a central attraction at
public gatherings where Scouting is represented.
Using a double A-frame to build a monkey bridge is a
departure from the common X-frame that supports the foot rope
and hand ropes, but it has two advantages: The double A-frame
provides a wider base making it less likely to tip over and the
positions of the A-frames can be adjusted so the span between
the hand ropes can be narrowed for better balance.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
o 8 8-foot x 4-inch A-frame legs
o 4 6-foot x 3-inch A-frame ledgers
o 24 15-foot x 1/4-inch lashing ropes for square lashings
o 1 50-foot x 1/2-inch or 3/4-inch foot rope
o 2 50-foot x 1/2-inch hand ropes
o 5 8-foot x 1/4-inch stringer ropes
o 6 10-foot x 1/4-inch lashing ropes for strop lashings
o 6 pioneering stakes for each 3-2-1 anchor OR
o 8 pioneering stakes and one 4-foot x 4- to 6-inch diameter
spar for each log-and-stake anchor
o 2 10-foot x 1/2-inch polypropylene or manila ropes for
rope grommets
o 2 pieces of scrap canvas or burlap for foot rope saddles
o binder twine for the back stays of anchor stakes


Larger Projects.
WHAT YOU’LL DO
There are many ways to build your bridge. Here’s one provided
by the project designer, Adolph Peschke:
Building the A-frames: Build four identical A-frames using the
8-foot spars for the two legs and 6-foot spars for the ledger.
Make sure the ledgers of each A-frame cross the legs at the
same height and that the tips of the legs intersect at an equal
distance from the tops. Lash each A-frame together with three
tight square lashings.
Double A-frame: When you have four identical A-frames, lash
two of them together. Hold the A-frames up and maneuver them
into position or lay one A-frame on the ground and put another
on top of it so that the bottom ledgers overlap one-half their
length (about 3 feet). The first step in lashing the A-frames
together is to go up where the two legs cross (the X formed by
one leg from each A-frame). Then with a tight square lashing,
lash the two legs together. The point where these legs are
lashed together is where the foot rope will rest. Adjust the
overlap of the two A-frames to adjust how high the foot rope
will be off the ground. Also note where the tops of the A-frames
are, because this is where the hand ropes will be.
To complete the double A-frame, stand it up so the butt ends
of all four legs rest solidly on level ground. Lash the two bottom
ledgers together where they overlap with three round lashings or
strop lashings.
A strop lashing is
easy to tie. Halve
the rope, place the
midpoint behind
what you’re
lashing, wrap both
ends around the
spars a few times
and finish with a
square knot.
78 PIONEERING


PIONEERING 79
.Larger Projects
Site Preparation: Before you erect the double A-frames, prepare
the site. Stretch a length of binder twine along the center line of
where the monkey bridge is to stand. Working from the center,
measure 10 feet toward each end to mark where the A-frames
go. They should be 20 feet apart. Then mark out another 10 feet
from each A-frame to where the anchors go.
Building the Anchors: The foot rope will be attached to
anchors at both ends. Before erecting the double A-frames, build
a 3-2-1 anchor, or a log-and-stake anchor, 10 feet from where
the A-frames will be erected.
Rope Grommet: After the anchors are built, attach a rope
grommet with a ring or shackle in it. (On a 3-2-1 anchor, make
sure the grommet is added before the tourniquets are applied.)
Position the A-frames: Prepare to erect the bridge by moving
the A-frames into position no more than 20 feet apart. Lay them
on the binder twine that marks the center line of the bridge.
Hand and Foot Ropes: Prepare the hand and foot ropes. Lay
the foot rope in a straight line off to the side of where the
A-frames are. Then lay the two hand ropes on the ground next
to each other so they’re parallel to the foot rope, 42 inches away.
Stringer Ropes: Add the stringer ropes that will go from the
foot rope to the hand ropes. Start by taking a turn around the
foot rope with an 8-foot long stringer rope so that both ends are
4-feet long. Add two more stringer ropes on both sides of the
center stringer rope (so there are five stringer ropes in all),
positioning them about 4 feet apart. Tie one end of each
stringer rope to one of the hand ropes with a clove hitch. Then
do the same with the other ends of the stringer ropes, attaching
them to the other hand rope.
20' 10'10'
Log-and-stake
anchor
3-2-1 anchor


80 PIONEERING
Larger Projects.
Assembling the Bridge: Place a piece of burlap or heavy
canvas (called a “saddle”) in the V formed by both double
A-frames. This will protect the foot rope and allow it to slide a
little in the V without interfering with the lashing rope.
Erect the Bridge: You’ll need a safety officer to watch for
problems and a signal caller to tell the crew what to do. Two
Scouts will lift and hold each double A-frame in place; two more
will lift the foot rope into the V of the double A-frames; two
more will lift the two hand ropes into place at the tops of the
A-frames. Lift everything into place then, holding the A-frames
steady, temporarily tie the hand and foot ropes into the rings of
the grommets using a roundturn with two half hitches.
Tightening the Foot Rope: Now you can put a strain on the
foot rope. It’s not necessary to use block and tackle since this
can put too much strain on the lashings, anchors, and the foot
rope itself. Whatever strain three or four Scouts can put on the
foot rope by pulling it by hand will be enough. As soon as the
bridge is crossed a few times, there will be a sag in the rope.
This is fine because it means you are working with reduced
strain on the foot rope as a safety measure.
Tightening the Hand Ropes: Tie the hand ropes to the top
ends of the A-frames. Loosen one end at a time from the
anchors. Then use a clove hitch on a bight to tie the hand ropes
to the top end of a leg on each side of the double A-frames. As
you’re tying these clove hitches, adjust the strain on the sections
of the hand ropes between the double A-frames to match the
sag of the foot rope. Also, adjust the length of the stringer ropes
so there is even strain between the foot rope and both hand
ropes. After the hand ropes are tied to the tops of the A-frames,
move down and retie the ends of the hand ropes to the rings in
the grommets using a roundturn with two half hitches.
Final Testing: With caution, one crew member can get on the
bridge as all lashings, anchors, and knots are observed by the
safety officer and all other crew members. Make adjustments as
required. If there is too much sag, retighten the hand and foot
ropes as necessary. Adjusting and maintaining the strain on the
hand and foot ropes can be handled using rope tackles.


PIONEERING 81
.Larger Projects
Single A-Frame Bridge
This bridge is simple to build because there
are few lashings needed for the center A-frame.
The A-frame is a triangular shape that resists
racking and provides strength for the structure.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
o 2 12-foot x 3-inch A-frame legs
o 1 6-foot x 2-inch bottom ledger
o 1 6-foot x 3-inch transom
o 4 10-foot x 3-inch walkway lateral spars
o 12 3-foot x 2-inch walkway cross spars
o 4 31/2-foot x 2-inch walkway cross spars
o 2 10-foot x 2-inch x 10-inch walkway planks
o 6 stakes
o 2 30-foot x 1/4-inch guy lines
WHAT YOU’LL DO
A-frame: Determine the depth of the creek or ravine to be
spanned. Add 8 feet to that measurement to get the total height
of the legs for the A-frame. For example, to span a creek 4 feet
deep, the legs of the A-frame should be 12 feet or longer. This
length allows for the distance from the butt ends of the A-frame
legs up to the transom that supports the walkways. The transom
should be about 1 foot higher than the banks of the creek. It
also allows for the height from the walkways up to the tops of
the legs, to permit free passage for a person along the
walkways. Lay the A-frame subassembly out on the ground to
check if the spars are long enough when lashed together for the
two requirements mentioned above.
Walkways: Build two 10-foot walkway sections as separate
subassemblies (see previous chapter).
A-frame Legs: When you’ve determined the length of the spars
for the legs of the A-frame, lash them together at the top with a
sturdy shear lashing.


82 PIONEERING
Larger Projects.
Ledger and Transom: To complete the A-frame, use square
lashings to lash the bottom ledger across the legs about 1 foot
from the bottom of the legs. Then lash a transom spar to
support the walkways at the proper height in relation to the
banks of the creek.
Add Guy lines: Using rolling hitches or roundturns with two
half hitches, add a light 1/4-inch guy line to the top of each leg,
about three-quarters of the way up. These will prevent the
A-frame from tipping over. On each bank, about 20 feet from
where the A-frame will be positioned, drive a stake into the
ground at a 20-degree angle.
Assembly: After making the walkways and A-frame, take them
to the assembly site. Place the A-frame in the center of the creek
and heel in the legs about 4 to 6 inches deep. At the same time,
level the transom to accept the walkways in a level position.
When the A-frame is upright and the transom is level, lash
both underspars on the walkways to the transom with strop
lashings at three points. Next, lash the cross spars at the ends of
the walkways to stakes on the banks of the creek with strop
lashings. Attach the guy lines to the stakes, driven into the
ground 20 feet away on either side, with rope tackles.


PIONEERING 83
.Larger Projects
Single
Trestle Bridge
This simple bridge uses a
single trestle and two
walkways. The legs of the
trestle are extended above
the walkways to provide a
way to attach handrails.
The length of the spars
listed for the walkways and
trestle will be enough to
build a bridge that will span
a creek or ravine up to 4
feet deep and 18 feet wide.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
o 2 8 or 10-foot x 3-inch trestle legs
o 1 4-foot x 3-inch trestle transom
o 1 4-foot x 2-inch trestle ledger
o 2 6-foot x 2-inch cross braces
o 4 10-foot x 3-inch walkway lateral spars
o 12 3-foot x 2-inch walkway cross spars
o 4 31/2-foot x 2-inch walkway cross spars
o 2 10-foot x 2-inch x 10-inch walkway planks
o 4 12-foot x 21/2-inch handrails
o 4 stakes
WHAT YOU’LL DO
Break up this project into four subassemblies: the trestle, the
two walkways, and the handrails.
Trestle: The legs for the trestle are spars that are about 3 inches
in diameter and 8 to 10 feet long. When choosing these spars,
take into account the depth of the creek you’re crossing. The
distance from the base of the legs to the top ledger (transom)
on the trestle should be about 1 foot higher than the level of the
banks of the creek. This will allow the walkways to slant up.


84 PIONEERING
Larger Projects.
Then allow an additional 4 feet in height on the legs from the
top ledger up to the top of the legs for attaching the handrails.
The top ledger of the trestle should be about 3 inches in
diameter since it also acts as the transom and carries all the
weight of the walkways and the person using it. The bottom
ledger can be smaller: a 2-inch diameter spar will work here.
Walkways: The two walkways are assembled as separate
subassemblies (see previous chapter). Note: make sure the
31/2-foot cross spars at the end of the walkway extend far
enough out to attach both the stakes
and the handrails without interfering
with the passageway.
Assemble the Bridge: Set the trestle
in the center of the creek. Heel in the
bottoms of the trestle legs by setting
them in holes approximately 4 to 6
inches deep. This will prevent the
trestle from shifting and is also a
way to level the transom spar as the
trestle is set in place so the walkways
are level.
Put the walkways in position
from both sides and lash the walkways’ underspars to the
transom (top ledger) of the trestle in three places using strop
lashings. Then drive stakes at the other end of the walkways.
Lash the ends of the cross spars on the walkways to the stakes
with strop lashings.
Handrails: Handrails help those crossing the bridge and add
strength to the entire structure. Handrails form triangles with
the walkway and the trestle leg. These triangles produce a
strong structure that prevents the bridge from racking. Lash the
handrails to the
top of the trestle
legs with square
lashings and to
the stakes with
simple strop
lashings.


PIONEERING 85
.Larger Projects
Single Lock Bridge
This is a well established
and basic design. Over the
years it has stood out as a
remarkable example of real
Scout engineering.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
This list of spars will build
a bridge to span a creek or
ravine approximately 4 feet
deep and 18 feet from bank
to bank.
o 4 6-foot x 3-inch trestle legs
o 4 4-foot x 21/2-inch trestle ledgers
o 1 4-foot x 3-inch trestle transom spar
o 4 6-foot x 2-inch cross braces
o 4 10-foot x 3-inch walkway lateral spars
o 12 3-foot x 2-inch walkway cross spars
o 4 31/2-foot x 2-inch walkway cross spars
o 2 10-foot x 2-inch x 10-inch planks
o 4 stakes
WHAT YOU’LL DO
The bridge consists of four subassemblies: two trestles
and two walkways.
Trestles: If necessary, adjust the length of the spars for
the trestle so that when they are placed in the creek,
the tops of the ledgers will be about 1 foot above the
level of the bank. This will give a comfortable slant to
the walkways. When constructing the two trestles, build
only one trestle first. Then as the second trestle is being
built, make sure the legs are narrower at the top and fit
between the legs of the first trestle.
When lashing on the top ledgers, leave enough
space from the top so when the legs interlock, there’s
enough room to fit the transom.


86 PIONEERING
Larger Projects.
Walkways: Each walkway consists of two lateral spars, six
cross spars, and two longer cross spars. One of these two longer
cross spars is used as an underspar at the end of the walkway
that is attached to the transom. The other longer cross spar is
used to anchor the walkways to the stakes.
Assembly: After building the
trestles and walkways, take them
to the assembly site (the creek or
ravine). Place the trestles in the
center of the creek so the tops of
the trestles are interlocked. Lift
the 3-inch diameter transom spar
to fit on top of the interlocked
trestle legs.
Heel in the bases of the legs
in holes 4 to 6 inches deep. At
the same time level the transom
spar so the walkways won’t slant.
Put the two walkways into
position. Lash the underspars on
the walkways to the transom spar
with strop lashings at three points.
Anchoring the Walkways: Finally, to anchor the walkways,
drive the stakes in the outside corners formed by the lateral
walkway spars and the first (31/2-foot) cross spars, and lash the
ends of the walkways to the stakes. By lashing the walkways to
the transom spar and lashing the ends of the walkways to the
stakes, you make a complete walkway unit that will prevent
movement and provide a sturdy bridge deck.
Interlocking
trestles Transom
spar


PIONEERING 87
.Larger Projects
4 x 4 Climbing Tower
This sturdy tower sees plenty of action wherever it’s built. Its a
simple design, but very solid. It’s formed by building two
trestles with top handrails, and joining them on each side with
three spreaders and a diagonal support. A rope ladder is used to
climb up to the platform.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
o 4 8-foot x 4-inch spars
for the legs
o 12 4-foot x 3-inch spars
for the spreaders
o 6 5-foot x 2- to 3-inch
spars for the diagonal
supports and X-braces
o 9 to 13 4-foot x 2- to
3-inch floor spars
o 4 2-foot x 2-inch ladder rungs
o 38 20-foot x 1/4-inch
lashing ropes
o 6 25-foot x 3
⁄8-inch ropes
for guy lines and ladders
o 2 35-foot x 1/4-inch ropes
for the floor lashings
o 8 pioneering stakes
o 4 sticks (for anchor back ties)
o binder twine
(for anchor back ties)
WHAT YOU’LL DO
Build the Trestles: For each
of two trestles, lay two 8-foot
spars next to one another on
the ground, making sure the
butt end of each is on the
bottom. With tight square
lashings, connect the legs


88 PIONEERING
Larger Projects.
about 3 inches from the bottom with a 4-foot
spreader (ledger), and about 6 inches from the
top with a 4-foot spreader (handrail). Select one
of the stoutest 4-foot spreaders and lash it
securely to the legs, so the underside of the spar
is 5-feet from the bottom. This leg will serve as
the trestle’s transom and act as a platform
support for the floor. Make sure the ends of the
4-foot spreaders extend out from the legs about 4
inches on each side.
Add the Cross Braces (X-braces): Lay one end
of one of the 5-foot spars on top of one 8-foot
leg, about a foot up from the bottom, and place
the other end underneath the other 8-foot leg,
about a foot down from the 4-foot transom. Lash
this 5-foot spar in place with square lashings.
Now take a second 5-foot spar, and cross it on
top of the first, forming an ‘X’, and lash it in
place. Where these cross braces intersect, spring
them together with a tight diagonal lashing.
Connect the Trestles: When both trestles are
complete, stand them up on their sides, parallel
to one another and join them together by lashing
a 4-foot (bottom) spreader tightly over each
trestle’s 4-foot ledger. Also lash a 4-foot top
spreader just over the handrails, and a 4-foot
middle spreader just over each platform support
(trestle transoms).
Tightly lash on a 5-foot diagonal support
from the bottom of one leg to just under the
X-brace on the other leg.
With all hands on deck, carefully flip over
the tower and, in the same fashion, join the
trestles on the other side. (When it comes time to
lash on the 5-foot diagonal support on the other
side, make sure the bottoms of the diagonals are
lashed on opposite trestles.) When the trestles are
connected on all four sides, with the whole crew
Make an overhand loop.
Reach through underneath and
grab the standing part.
Pull the standing part through
the overhand loop.


PIONEERING 89
.Larger Projects
pitching in, carefully stand up the tower and
place it in position.
Anchor the Tower: tie one end of a 25-foot
rope to each 8-foot leg, 2 feet from the top,
using a roundturn with two half hitches.
Construct a 1-1 anchor, 12 feet out at 45º
from each corner. With rope tackles, secure
the guy lines to the 1-1 anchors.
Lash on the Floor: Lay out the floor spars
on top of the platform supports (trestle
transoms) and using the 35-foot ropes, lash
them securely in place with good floor
lashings.
Build and Attach the Rope Ladder: Your
rope ladder is made by tying marlin spike
hitches to the four 2-foot ladder rungs using
the two other 25-foot ropes. Start by tying one
end of each rope to the middle spreader on
the side of the tower you want the ladder,
using a clove hitch. Leave enough tail in the
rope so you can tie a bowline with a small
loop in the end. Let this bowline dangle
down 1 to 2 feet towards the ground.
Space the rungs about 15 inches apart.
When all the rungs have been added and are
evened out on each side, carry the end of
each rope under the 4-foot bottom spreader
and thread them through the loops of the
bowlines that are dangling down. Now
tighten each side of the ladder by pulling on
the end of each side, using the bowlines’
loops like rope tackles. Finish off with a
couple of half hitches.
Insert the rung in the loop made
out of the standing part.
Adjust the rung and tighten the hitch.
Rear view





PIONEERING 91
.Larger Projects
Four-Flag Gateway Tower
This simple project is an impressive feat of engineering. While
it’s a tower that requires hoisting, it’s also a campsite gateway
and an elaborate flag display. It can create a spectacular effect.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
Bamboo works great for this project.
o 4 14-foot x 21/2-inch leg spars
o 6 8-foot x 2-inch X-brace spars
o 4 6-foot x 2-inch X-brace spars
o 4 6-foot x 2-inch support spars
o 6 4-foot x 2-inch leg spreaders
o 45 15-foot x 1/4-inch lashing ropes
o 8 6 to 10-foot x 1/4-inch lashing ropes (for flags)
o 4 35-foot x 3
⁄8-inch guy lines
o 8 24-inch pioneering stakes
WHAT YOU’LL DO
Assemble the Four-Foot Sides: Lay out two pairs of 14-foot
spars for the tower legs, side by side, about 31/2 feet apart. Be
sure the butt ends are even at the bottom so the tower will
stand up straight. With square lashings, tightly lash each pair of
legs together starting with a 4-foot bottom leg spreader about 6
inches from the butt ends. Lash on a 4-foot middle leg spreader
in the middle of the 14-foot legs (7 feet up), and a 4-foot top
spreader about 3 inches from the top of the 14-foot legs.
When the legs of each 4-foot side are joined with the three
4-foot spreaders, lash on two 6-foot X-braces using square
lashings to join the ends to the legs, and a diagonal lashing
where they cross, forming a trestle in the bottom half of the legs.
(Three of the ends are lashed to the inside of the legs and one on
the outside, so a slight gap is created where they cross. As you
start the diagonal lashing, this gap will be sprung together.)
This project consists of several sub-assemblies,
and with a division of labor, can be built in good
order e.g. building both of the 4-foot sides while
simultaneously, laying out the position of the legs
and building the anchors.


92 PIONEERING
Larger Projects.
Joining One of the Four-Foot Sides: Turn both sides up
horizontally, parallel to one another about 51/2 feet apart. Make
sure the bottoms are even. Lash on one of the 6-foot support
spars directly above the 4-foot middle spreader. Lash another
one of the 6-foot support spars directly under the 4-foot side
spreader at the very top.
6' support
spar
14' leg
spar
8' X-brace
8' X-brace
6' X-brace
4' leg
spreader
14' middle
leg spreader


PIONEERING 93
.Larger Projects
Now, lash on two of the 8-foot X-brace spars diagonally
between the two 6-foot supports using square lashings to join
the ends to the legs, and a diagonal lashing where they cross,
forming a trestle in the top part of the wide (6-foot) side.
Join the other Side: To make the lashings to join the other
side, you have to get the whole crew together to carefully lift
and roll the tower over 180° so that it’s laying on the X-brace,
and the other side is easier to get to. Once rolled over, repeat
the above process to join together the remaining Four-Foot-Side.
Lashing on the Middle X-Brace: This X-brace is what will
keep the sides from racking. Lash the two remaining 8-foot
X-brace spars diagonally across the legs just under the 4-foot
middle leg spreader. Use square lashings to lash them to the
legs and a diagonal lashing where they cross. To accomplish
this, some crew members will have to hold up the top of the
tower so that there is better access to all four ends of the 8-foot
X-brace spars.
Lashing on the Flags: Lash the flagpoles of the four selected
flags to the top of each tower leg using a couple of tight round
lashings.
Anchors and Guy lines: Lay out the position of the four legs
on the ground. (This can be done at anytime.) Then determine
where the four anchors for the guy lines will be placed to
steady the legs of the tower. Using the pioneering stakes, build
four 1-1 anchors. Each should extend 16 feet, and 45° out from
the leg. When all the lashings are done, move the tower to
where it will be hoisted.
Before Hoisting the Tower: Attach the four guy lines securely
to the legs, about 10 feet up, with rolling hitches or roundturns
with two half hitches. Note: Since this design has no halyards,
before hoisting the tower make sure the flags are unfurled.
(With longer legs, halyards can be added to the tops of the legs
extending three to four feet above the top leg spreader.)
Note: This design is not self-standing. Therefore,
allowing for the necessary guy lines, it requires a
space wide and deep enough to accommodate a
16-foot x 16-foot area.


94 PIONEERING
Larger Projects.
Hoisting the Tower: You’ll need a whole crew to do the
hoisting. Get ready to hoist the tower by delegating the
following:
• One signal caller who tells the crew members when and
how fast to pull on the ropes;
• One safety officer who’s on the look out for all safety
considerations and signs of trouble during the hoisting;
• Four Scouts to serve as “lifters,” to lift the top 6-foot
support spar that’s on the ground, whose job it is to first
lift and then push the tower up;
• Two Scouts, one on each of the two guy lines attached to
the legs, to make sure the tower isn’t over pulled and
topples over; and
• Four “pullers” who will use the two guy lines facing up as
hoisting ropes to pull the tower until it is standing.
When everyone is in position, the signal caller should
direct the Scouts on the hoisting ropes (the pullers) to hoist the
tower into position, while the lifters start lifting. Care should be
exercised not to over pull the tower. As soon as the tower is
standing, four Scouts should temporarily tie the guy lines to the
anchors using a roundturn with two half hitches.
Heeling the Tower: If the tower is uneven, you can heel the
butt ends of the legs 4 to 6 inches deep as needed to make it
more level.
Tightening the Guy lines: As soon as the tower is in position,
go to each of the anchors and untie the roundturn with two half
hitches and replace it with a rope tackle. Use the rope tackles to
hold the tower steady, by gradually applying strain to each of
the four guy lines at the same time. Do this by tying a butterfly
knot in each guy line about 6 to 8 feet from the anchor. Then
wrap the running end of the guy line around the forward stake
of the anchor and back through the loop in the butterfly knot.
When rope tackles are tied to all four anchors, gradually tighten
the lines. Apply enough strain to each of the guy lines to hold
the tower firm and in a vertical position. Then tie off the rope
tackles by securing the running ends with half hitches.
Hoisting a tower
in itself is an
exhilarating
experience, and
even more so
when the tower
is flying your
flags!


PIONEERING 95
.Larger Projects
Double Tripod Chippewa Kitchen
The Chippewa Kitchen is the ultimate camp kitchen pioneering
project, providing a huge element of convenience to a wide
range of camp cooking operations. The Chippewa Kitchen
provides a raised surface for food preparation, a nifty place to
hang tools and utensils, a framework from which a pot can be
safely suspended over a cooking fire, and primarily, a
convenient, raised cooking surface for cooking over hot coals.


96 PIONEERING
Larger Projects.
WHAT YOU’LL NEED
o 2 10-foot x 3-inch platform support spars (For a smaller
kitchen, 8-foot spars work great.)
o 6 8-foot x 3-inch tripod leg spars
o 4 6-foot x 21/2-inch tripod braces
o 2 6-foot x 21/2 to 3-inch front tripod braces (to support the
platform support spars)
o 20 to 40 3 to 4-foot x 2-inch floor spars (depending on the
size of the cooking surface required)
o 16 15-foot x 1/4-inch manila lashing ropes for square lashings
o 2 20-foot x 1/4-inch manila lashing ropes for tripod lashings
o binder twine for floor lashing
o burlap, terry cloth, or canvas to cover cooking platform
WHAT YOU’LL DO
Build the Tripods: Lay three 8-foot tripod legs side by side and
lash them together with a tight tripod lashing. Make sure the
butt ends are at the bottom and even. Stand the tripod up by
crossing the outside legs underneath the middle leg. Repeat this
process for the second tripod.
Lash on the Tripod Braces: Connect the two outside legs with
one of the thicker 6-foot front tripod braces. With tight square
lashings, lash the brace so it is perpendicular to the ground and
three feet high. Lash another 6-foot tripod brace to each outside
leg and connect them to the middle leg with square lashings,
about two feet and two and a half feet high respectfully.
Repeat this process for the second tripod, making sure one
of the thicker front tripod braces connecting the outside legs is
again, three feet high.
Position the Tripods: Place the tripods so the 6-foot tripod
braces lashed to the outside legs (the thicker ones that are three
feet off the ground) are facing each other. These braces are the
ones that will hold up the long platform support spars, which in
turn will support the cooking platform. The distance between
the two tripods should be close enough so the long platform
support spars can extend over each brace by at least six inches.


PIONEERING 97
.Larger Projects
Lash on the Platform Support Spars: Place the long platform
support spars parallel to each other on top of the three foot high
tripod brace on each tripod. Space them apart so the shortest
floor spar will extend over their edges by six inches on either
side. Lash them in place with tight square lashings.
Lash on the Floor Spars: The cooking surface is made up of 3
to 4-foot x 2-inch floor spars, depending on how wide a cooking
area will be required. These are lashed onto the parallel
platform supports with a floor lashing using binder twine.
Prepare the Cooking Surface: Prior to adding 2 to 3 inches of
mineral soil, and to keep he mineral soil from falling though
spaces between the floor spars, spread pieces of burlap, terry
cloth, or canvas over the platform.
Cover the platform: Use a layer of mineral soil thick enough to
protect the floor spars from the intense heat that will be
generated from the coals during cooking.





PIONEERING 99
.PIONEERING RESOURCES.Pioneering Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Guide to Safe
Scouting; Deck of First Aid; Emergency
First Aid pocket guide; Wilderness First
Aid Manual; Wilderness First Aid Field
Guide; Knots pocket guide; Deck of
Knots; Knots and How to Tie Them;
Camping, Climbing, First Aid, Model
Design and Building, Textile, and
Woodwork merit badge pamphlets
Books
Green, Larry. Scout Pioneering Good Ol’
Fashioned Outdoor Fun, Creative
Space Publishing, 2017
Findley, Gerald L. RopeWorks Plus,
booksurge.com, 2007
Sweet, John. Scout Pioneering, Scouts
Canada, 1974
Websites
Guide to Safe Scouting
www.scouting.org/health-and-safety/gss
Scout Pioneering
scoutpioneering.com
Troop Leader Resources
troopleader.scouting.org/
program-feature-pioneering
Acknowledgments
Thanks go to Larry Green for writing this
pamphlet. Thanks also go to the former
National Camping Committee for their
support, and to the Merit Badge
Maintenance Committee and the
National Scouts BSA Committee for their
guidance.
For over 25 years, Scout pioneering
has primarily been influenced by the late
Adolph Peschke. Much of the content in
this pamphlet has been taken directly or
adapted from his writings. Mr. Peschke’s
input into the way Scout pioneering is
approached and carried out has assured
the success of numerous pioneering
endeavors. It’s because of Mr. Peschke
that many of today’s Scout pioneering
enthusiasts are so avid in their pursuit to
provide our youth with repeated
opportunities to engineer and orchestrate
Pioneering Resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


100 PIONEERING
PIONEERING RESOURCES.Pioneering Resources.
the construction of pioneering structures
that are useful or just plain fun.
It is appropriate to also acknowledge
the extraordinary jamboree staff of the
pioneering area and their leaders, whose
love for what they do is evidenced by
their dedication, along with the obvious
fun they have in the midst of all their
joyfully undertaken hard work.
Acknowledgements pertaining to
Scout pioneering would not be complete
without a reference to the late John
Thurman, longtime Gilwell Camp Chief.
His wisdom, his wit, and his insight into
what Scouting is all about live on
through his writings and stories.
Photo and Illustration Credits
All photos and illustrations are the
property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
James Chaplin—page 101 (bottom)
Tom Copeland—pages 16 and 101 (top)
Larry Green—pages 11-15, 17-28, 30-37,
40, 43-48, 51-55, 57, 59-68, 70-76, 78,
79, 81-90, 95, and 97
Bruce Levitt—page 100
Bryan Payne—page 6
Michael Roytek—pages 10, 36 (bottom),
38, 58, 98, and 102








PIONEERING 103
.Notes


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.