READING14 Printing
FIELDBOOKScouting’s Manual of Basic and Advanced Skills for Outdoor Adventure
FIELDBOOKScouting’s Manual of Basic and Advanced Skills for Outdoor Adventure
3/5/14 1:12 PMSCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R G I R L S
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R B O Y S


READING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
35940
ISBN 978-0-8395-0148-0
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Reading or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.


READING 3


4 READING
Working With Your Merit Badge Counselor
Talking with your counselor about your reading is a big part of fulfilling
the requirements for the Reading merit badge. Your counselor has not
read every book written. That would be impossible for anyone. Tens
of thousands of new books are published each year. Add to those the
classic books from earlier years, and even the most enthusiastic reader
has a hard time keeping up with all the books worth reading.
Your counselor, therefore, will not be familiar with all the books
you will read. Your counselor, as well as your family members and
your school or public librarian, may recommend books he or she has
enjoyed, but the final choice is yours. The books and other materials
you select should be ones you want to read. If your counselor has not
read one or more of your choices, briefly tell what the book is about
and why you wanted to read it. Your counselor might like to read some
of the books and other materials you have especially enjoyed.
If you have trouble reading, tell your counselor. He or she can get
you some help.


READING 5
Contents
Why Read? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
What Is Reading? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Reading for Fun. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Reading for Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
Reading on the Internet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Volunteering for Reading . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Reading Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44


“You can cover
a great deal
of country
in books.
”—Andrew Lang,
Scottish scholar
and poet


READING 7
.Why Read?
Why Read?
If you have ever wanted to go back in time or wished you could
visit the future, if you are curious about the world, or if you are
interested in how things work or like to learn new things, these
are all reasons why you should want to read.
If you dream big dreams, or if you wonder
how people make their dreams come true, in the
pages of books, you can find everything in the
world—or out of it—that interests you. If people
fascinate you, you will meet an endless parade
of memorable characters, real and fictional, in
biographies and novels. If science or nature is
your thing, books can give you the facts from
aardvarks to zygotes. Books can make you a
time traveler, leading you deep into the histori-
cal past or, even deeper, into the prehistoric
ages before people learned to write. Books can
take you far into the future and far out into the
realms of imagination.
In the pages of a book you can go anywhere.
Some books will walk you down the street. Some
will take you to the world’s biggest cities. Others
will carry you off to high mountains, desert
wildernesses, or polar ice caps. Some books will
take you off Earth and set you down on another
planet, where you may meet some of the weirdest
characters ever created.
Reading is fun. It’s fascinating. It’s full of surprises. And it
will take you places you can’t get to in any other way.
“My advice
about reading
is to do a lot
of it. Those
make-believe
worlds are the
best worlds
I know.
”—Stephen King,
American novelist


8 READING
Why Read?.
The Rewards of Reading
If you watch television, you know that TV tells stories, reports
current events, and offers sports lovers an endless schedule of
athletic events. With all that’s on television to amuse, entertain,
and teach people, you might think there is no
special reason to read books—especially since you
read a lot of books for school. Textbooks and tele-
vision both have their places. But your own per-
sonal reading can take you far beyond anything
you will get from television watching or classroom
assignments.
Through reading, you can learn about the
things that interest you. You can learn about
the things no one seems able to tell you about—
the subjects that people seem uninformed or
uncomfortable about. You will find that many
authors have written about the things that
interest you.
Books can be fun. At the same time
they can help you understand who you
are, where you are going, and where
you want to be. Reading about other
people your age facing the same sorts of
problems you face can help you feel less
alone. The thoughts and experiences of
other people as they are shown in books
will help you know what you think and
feel about yourself and others.
Through reading, you will gain a
deeper understanding of yourself, your
family, your friends, your country, and
the world in which you live. Reading
can help you figure out how you see the
world and how you will make decisions.
Reading can help you find your place in
the world.
“I declare after
all there is
no enjoyment
like reading!
”—Jane Austen,
English novelist


READING 9
.Why Read?
How Many Books Can You Carry?
Today we have a wealth of great reading material available through
electronic devices like iPads, Kindles and others, which offer some
great advantages, including storing multiple volumes and stories in
one little device. These resources make reading both engaging and
effective in several ways:
E-Books and Digital Libraries: Platforms like Kindle, Apple
Books, and Google Play Books offer vast libraries. Access
everything from classic literature to the latest bestsellers, often
with features like adjustable text sizes and built-in dictionaries.
Educational Apps: There are many apps designed
specifically for youth that promote reading and literacy. Apps
like Epic!, Reading Eggs, and Raz-Kids provide interactive
books and reading exercises tailored to different age levels
and reading abilities.
Interactive Features: Many e-books and apps include
elements such as animation, sound effects, and videos that
make the reading experience more engaging. These features
can help maintain interest and support comprehension.
Audiobooks: Services like Audible and Libby offer a
wide range of audiobooks. Listening to books can improve
comprehension and expose you to a broader range of literature,
especially for those who struggle with reading text.
Online Articles and Blogs: Websites geared toward youth, like ScoutLife.org,
offer articles on a variety of topics. They are a great way to encourage reading.
Educational Games and Platforms: Websites and apps like Khan Academy
and ABCmouse incorporate reading into their educational games and activities.
These platforms blend learning with fun.
Digital Reading Communities: Platforms like Goodreads have sections
specifically for younger readers where you can get book recommendations, read
reviews, and discuss books with peers. This can be a great way to encourage a
love of reading through social interaction.
Reading on Phones: Many people use their smartphones to read e-books,
articles, and other digital content. Phones offer the convenience of reading
on-the-go and access to a wide range of reading apps, making it easy to fit
reading into your busy lives.
Renting Digital Books: Services like Amazon's Kindle Store and other online
bookstores offer the option to rent digital books. This can be a cost-effective
way to access popular or educational books without needing to purchase them,
making it easier to explore a variety of reading materials.
Adjustable Features: Many reading apps and devices allow for customization
in terms of font type, size, and background color. This can make reading easier
and more enjoyable, especially for people with visual or learning differences.
By leveraging these digital tools and resources, anyone can enjoy a wide
range of reading materials that cater to their interests and reading levels.


10 READING
Why Read?.
Reading for Your Future
Maybe you have heard teachers say that a
young person who does not know how to
read is not likely to make it in life. You might
feel that’s an unkind thing to say. But the
truth is, for many fields that young people
might want to consider for their lifetime work,
reading is absolutely necessary.
Without the ability to read quickly and
with understanding, a person would find
it nearly impossible to train for a career in
medicine or law or to become a scientist,
engineer, computer specialist, teacher, or
business owner or professional. In fact, you
must be a good reader to pursue any career
that requires keeping up with progress and
communicating in writing with coworkers.
Reading opens opportunities that are closed
to nonreaders.
“The man who
does not read
books has
no advantage
over the man
who can’t
read them.
”—Mark Twain, American
writer and humorist
Once mastered, reading can become one of the most important skills in your life,
both now and in the future. How do people become good readers? They read often.


READING 11
.Why Read?
Not being able to read makes life much
harder. Reading is an important part of everyday
life. People who are illiterate (unable to read or
write) find it difficult or impossible to fill out a
job application or read street signs or a recipe
on a soup can. In today’s information-filled
world, people simply do not function well if
they cannot read.
“Once you learn
to read, you
will be forever
free.
”—Frederick Douglass,
American social reformer
and abolitionist





READING 13
.What Is Reading?
What Is Reading?
Maybe you have enjoyed books, magazines, and
the internet for years, without ever thinking of
reading as a skill you have mastered, just as
carpenters who build the frameworks of houses
use skills they have mastered.
When you first went to school (whether
you knew it at the time), your teacher’s most
important goal was teaching you how to read.
Reading specialists have developed countless
ways to teach reading. You were taught by one
method or maybe more than one, especially if
your family moved and you changed schools.
What were you learning as you began to
master the skill of reading? Basically, reading
is making sense out of symbols that in com-
binations become words and in combinations
of words become sentences. Over time, you
identify the symbols or letters without being
consciously aware that you are making an
identification. When you see a g you know
it is a g because you learned it as a g. You
learned the meaning for that symbol.
In fact, the letter g is nothing more than
an arrangement of lines and curves that has
taken on a clear meaning. It is entirely possible that g could
have been designed differently—as Q, perhaps—and you could
have learned this different symbol for that letter.
When you learn another language—Japanese, for instance,
or Arabic or Russian—that uses a set of symbols different from
the set you know, it becomes clear that reading is the ability to
understand symbols. Together these symbols make up words
that are used to describe objects, acts, or ideas.
“Literacy is a
bridge from
misery to
hope.
”—Kofi Annan, Ghanaian
diplomat and former
Secretary-General
of the United Nations


14 READING
What Is Reading?.
Like the symbols we use for letters, the words people have
invented to stand for different things are often pretty much a
matter of chance. By connecting words with the things they
stand for, a child learns what others mean when they say, for
instance, roof. Most children somehow absorb the fact that
roof refers to something above a house, not something under
it. However, if you think about it, you may decide that English
speakers made a chance, or arbitrary, decision when they
chose to call a roof a roof instead of, say, a floor.
To better understand this whole idea, it helps to study a
foreign language. The “chancy,” or arbitrary, nature of words is
easier to see when you are learning the meanings of words in
a language other than your own.
Another definition
of reading is the
skill and ability
to receive infor-
mation through
means other than
direct contact or
observation.
The Skill of
Reading
Reading may be the most
important skill a Scout can
master. It is a skill that
prepares and allows you
to learn about the world
and society. It helps you
grow as a leader. It helps
you learn from the experi-
ences of others.
No one is born self-
sufficient. Self-sufficiency
(being able to provide for
your own needs) is learned
day by day as you grow up.
Reading helps you learn
self-sufficiency.
The more you read,
the more you know.
The more you know,
the farther you will go.


READING 15
.What Is Reading?
Braille: “Hands-On” Reading
A system of six simple dots, developed around 1820, presented an
invaluable gift to people who are blind: the means with which to read
and write. Frenchman Louis Braille, blinded at age 3, was a teenager
when he created the code now known worldwide by his name. The
first Braille book, a three-volume history of France, was published in
1837. Today, Braille is used across the globe to publish books, maga-
zines, scientific charts, and sheet music.
Braille is read by running the finger over a series of raised dots
on a page. Each cell contains six dots, which fit easily under the
fingertip. These six dots can be combined in 63 different ways to
represent letters, numbers, punctuation, and other symbols. Most
publications use Grade 2 Braille, which uses contractions to save
space and make reading easier. (If every letter is written in Braille,
Grade 1 Braille is being used.)
Braille can be “handwritten” using a slate and stylus to punch
out words, or it can be “typed” by a machine called a braillewriter.
Today, there also are software programs that translate Braille; Braille
personal printers; portable, electronic Braille notetakers; and Braille
displays that make the information on a computer screen readable via
a portable, refreshable surface.


“By its very
nature, the
novel indicates
that we are
becoming.
”—Carlos Fuentes, Mexican
novelist and essayist


READING 17
.Reading for Fun
Reading for Fun
With a good book you can relax, stop boredom, and
be entertained for hours or days. Reading for fun is
at the heart of requirement 1 for this merit badge.
You can read simply to enjoy and appreciate a writ-
er’s way with words. You also can apply what you
find in books to your own life and concerns.
As you choose six books to read for require-
ment 1, think about your interests. What do you
like? What are you curious about?
You will find it fun to learn all you can about
your favorite subject. If you play sports, you might
want to read a book about your favorite game and
maybe a biography of a famous athlete. If you’re into
astronomy, you can read both fiction and nonfiction
books about the stars and planets.
Is there a period in history that interests you? A
realm from legend or mythology? A far corner of Earth?
Maybe your hobby is fishing, or fast cars, or music.
Maybe you’ve seen a great movie, and now you would
like to read the book that the movie is based on.
Whatever intrigues you, you can be sure someone
has written about it. Finding six books (of four differ-
ent types) to read for requirement 1 won’t be hard. Your
merit badge counselor or a librarian can help you narrow
your choices from the countless books available.
Even with expert help, however, you may find that
a book you have chosen is not to your taste. That’s no
problem. One of the great things about reading is that
you are free to dislike what you are reading. Maybe that
particular book doesn’t tell you enough; maybe it tells
you too much. Or it may just bore you.
Whatever the reason, feel free to abandon a book you
don’t like. Put it aside and pick another. There are too many
good books to read for you to spend time on a book that does
not satisfy you.
“For me, a
holiday is
about taking
a book and
going to a
mountain
and
reading.
”—Sonam Kapoor,
Indian film actress


18 READING
Reading for Fun.
Adventures in Reading
Requirement 3 asks you to read books of different types. Books are
divided into two big groups depending on whether they are based on
facts or imagined stories. There are many types, or genres, of books
within these groups. A genre is a group of books that share something
in common. For example, books in the biography genre tell true stories
about the lives of real people. Books in the fantasy genre tell imagined
stories about places and circumstances that cannot be logically true.
Yet the reader is expected to suspend disbelief, or go along with the
author on this reading adventure.
Nonfiction includes factual writing such as the Scouts BSA hand-
book, Fieldbook, merit badge pamphlets, and field guides. You read
nonfiction to get information or learn about a subject, person, or event.
Some of the types of nonfiction are:
• How-to manuals
• Travel guides
• Biographies and autobiographies
• Books about history, science, energy, animals, politics, sports, and
other subjects
Fiction is made up. It is created in the author’s imagination and
may be based on facts and real people or places, but it isn’t true.
Fiction takes many forms, such as novels, short stories, essays, poems,
and plays. Some of the types, or genres, of fiction are:
You will discover that a genre may have subgroups, or subtypes.
Science fiction, for example, may be further categorized as apocalyptic
(end of the world), spy-fi, time travel, or superheroes. You can focus
your reading interest or expand it, as you like.
Your librarian may suggest books that have won the Newbery
Award, the National Book Award for Young People’s Literature, or your
state’s award for outstanding books for young readers. The resources
section of this pamphlet has more information about finding some of
these award winners.
• Science fiction
• Adventure
• Mystery
• Fantasy
• Horror
• Myth and legend and folklore
• Poetry
• Drama, or plays


READING 19
.Reading for Fun
Using Your Library
To complete all parts of
requirement 1, you need to
know your way around a
library. Start at the library’s
catalog. It will be either a
card catalog or (more likely) a
computerized catalog that has
information on every book in
the library’s collection.
At one time, most librar-
ies used a card catalog that
listed each book and item in
the library’s collection on indi-
vidual index cards. The cards were filed in alphabetical order
by title, by author, and by subject. Card catalogs were easy to
use, but it was hard to keep them up-to-date. Making cards for
new books took a lot of time.
Today, you can still find card catalogs in some libraries.
But computerized systems have replaced the old-style card
system in most libraries. Like the card catalog, a computer
catalog lists books three ways: by author (last name first), by
title, and by subject. To look up The Greatest: Muhammad Ali,
for instance, you could search the computer catalog by the
author’s name (Myers, Walter Dean), by the book’s title
(without the The), or by subject (Ali, Muhammad). See the
illustrations on the following pages.
When you find a book you want to examine more
closely, write down the book’s call number. A call number
is a combination of numbers and letters that identifies the
book and tells where it will be found on the shelves. Using
that unique number, you can locate the book on the library’s
shelves. A librarian will be happy to show you how.
If you are not looking for a specific book or a particular
author, search by subject. Suppose you want to find books
about wilderness survival. Choose “Subject” from the list of
search options, and enter “wilderness survival” as the search
term. The computer will display every title in the library’s
collection that has to do with the topic. For a more detailed
description of a book that interests you, click on the title.


20 READING
Reading for Fun.
Title search
Author search


READING 21
.Reading for Fun
With some computerized catalogs, you can enter the author’s name in
any order or search by only the last name. Ask your librarian which
works best with the system you are using.
Subject search
Focus on Eye Fitness
When you read a lot, especially if you use a tablet or computer,
remember that it’s important to take care of your eyes. Eyestrain,
or tired eyes, is a common condition that isn’t serious, but it
definitely can be annoying. Fight off eyestrain by practicing these
good reading habits.
• Make sure you have the appropriate eyewear. If you have
been prescribed with glasses for reading, wear them!
• Read in a well-lit area (not too bright, not too dim), with the
light source directed onto the page.
• Give your eyes a break every 20 minutes or so by focusing on
something far away for 20 seconds.
• If you’re having trouble focusing on the words on the page, tell
your parent or guardian and discuss seeing an eye-care profes-
sional soon. You should have your eyes checked annually.


22 READING
Reading for Fun.
Classification Systems
When you have found the book you are looking for, also skim
the titles of the books beside it on the shelves. All the books
with similar call numbers have similar subjects.
Nonfiction books are arranged on library shelves by
subject. Almost all school and public libraries use the Dewey
decimal classification system to group books by subject. Some
libraries have their own systems for arranging books, or they
use the Library of Congress classification system. Ask a librarian
about the method used in your school or public library, and
ask for any help you need to locate books on the shelves.
Most public libraries have special sections or departments
for children, adults, and sometimes young adults. The books
you choose to read for requirement 1 may come from any
or all of these sections. A librarian can show you where each
section is and help you pick books that fit your needs, interests,
and reading level. A librarian also can tell you how to get your
own library card, if you don’t already have one.
Be careful with
library books and
books that belong
to other people.
Take care not to
damage them or
mark them in
any way.


READING 23
.Reading for Fun
Main Dewey Decimal Classification Groups
000–099 General (encyclopedias, bibliographies, periodicals, journalism)
100–199 Philosophy and psychology (including ethics, logic, and the
paranormal such as ghosts, ESP, and alien abduction)
200–299 Religion
300–399 Social sciences (political science, economics, law, education,
customs, folklore)
400–499 Language (languages, dictionaries, grammar)
500–599 Natural sciences and mathematics (astronomy, physics,
chemistry, geology, paleontology, biology, zoology, botany)
600–699 Technology and applied sciences (medicine, engineering,
aviation, automotive repair, agriculture, animal science,
gardening, business, radio, television)
700–799 The arts (architecture, sculpture, painting, music,
photography, theater, film)
800–899 Literature (novels, poetry, plays, criticism)
900–999 Geography and history (including travel guides,
biography, genealogy)


24 READING
Reading for Fun.
“Some books
are to be tasted,
others to be
swallowed, and
some few to
be chewed and
digested.
”—Francis Bacon, English
philosopher and statesman


READING 25
.Reading for Fun
Say ‘Yes!’ to Reading Here
There are many great reading resources in Scouting. Check these out:
Scout Life
scoutlife.org
Scout Life is the monthly magazine of Scouting America. It has its
own mascot, Scout the Eagle, who answers readers’ letters and is the
subject of a comic strip. Besides special features on Scouting outings
and topics, there are stories about adventure, entertainment, history,
science, technology, sports, jokes, hobbies, and more. Scouts are
invited to submit stories. You can subscribe to
Scout Life through your Scout unit or use
promo code SLMBP15 online for a special
half-price discount.
Scout Life Say Yes To Reading! Contest
go.scoutlife.org/readingcontest
Each year Scout Life sponsors the
popular “Say Yes To Reading!” contest.
There are categories for youth of all
ages, and the winners earn great prizes.
Plus, everyone who enters gets a patch.
Scout Life Fiction
fiction.scoutlife.org
Scout Life hires some of the best writers in the country to give readers a
slew of stories. You can read many of them online. Check out exclusive
tales by today’s top writers like Anthony Horowitz of the Alex Rider
series; favorite stories like “Wild Horses,” “Really, Really Lost In Space,”
and “Oliver’s Great Big Universe;” and all-time classics like Arthur C.
Clarke’s “The Sunjammer” and Jack London’s “The King of Mazy May.”
Official Scouting America Youth Publications
scoutshop.org
Scouting America’s official Scout Shop has a large collection of books
for Scouts, including fiction, adventure, and hobby how-to guides.
Plus, it’s your source for Scouts BSA handbooks, the Patrol Leader
Handbook, Scouting safely materials, merit badge pamphlets, camp
cookbooks and a lot more.


26 READING
Reading for Fun.
Making Time to Read
You’re busy. You have school, Scouts, sports, homework, your
hobbies, club meetings, or maybe a part-time job. How can
you find time to read?
“The trick is to teach yourself to read in small sips as well
as in long swallows,” advises Stephen King, best-selling novel-
ist and short-story writer. “I take a book with me everywhere
I go, and find there are all sorts of opportunities to dip in.” He
reads whenever he has to wait—while standing in line, in the
theater before the show starts, and in doctors’ waiting rooms,
for example.
You can do the same thing by reading during the breaks
between activities—as you ride to sports practice or for a
few minutes before homework time or bedtime, for example.
Add up your “break reading” minutes (15 in the morning on
the way to school, 15 in the afternoon while you wait for
your ride, and 15 to 30 minutes before bed) and you may
find you’re reading 45 minutes or an hour a day—a perfectly
respectable total.
If you “sample” a
book but find
it too hard, too
easy, or just not
interesting,
you do not
have to finish it.


READING 27
.Reading for Fun
Time-Taming Tips
Aside from reading instead of watching television, here are
some other strategies for making time to read.
• Make reading a part of your regular schedule. Set a “book
hour” and stick to it.
• Look at how you spend your time. Write out your schedule
for a typical week or keep an activity log. Drop some
activities that are less important or
less fun than your main interests,
and read instead.
• You might read less during the
school year or while your sport is
in season, but catch up when you
have more time. Fill lazy summer
afternoons with fun reading and
an icy drink. Many libraries have
summer reading clubs that give
prizes for reading a certain number
of books.
• Carry nature field guides with you
on hiking or camping trips to read
during occasional free moments.
• Read during car rides, plane flights,
and family vacations. Before your
trip or outing, read books, maps,
brochures, and other materials about
where you are going. Share these
materials with your family or fel-
low travelers. If you’re not traveling,
read about the faraway places you
would like to visit. Also look for fic-
tion set in those places.
• Save time at the library. Check out
books for pleasure reading when
you’re there for school assignments.
• Read what interests you. Time goes
fast when you’re reading for the fun
of it. And the more you read, the
faster you’ll be able to read.
If you can’t give up TV for books,
try linking the two. Find books that
have been made into movies or TV
shows and read them before you
watch the filmed version. Read
biographies of your favorite
movie or TV actors, or books
about how movies and TV shows
are made. If you see a program
on TV that interests you, look for
books on that subject. In fact,
some programs have companion
books that give more information
or behind-the-scenes details.
Ask your librarian or counselor
for help locating a “read-more-
about-it” book.





READING 29
.Reading for Information
Reading for Information
For requirement 5 you will research subjects that interest you.
You can pick any current topic, but your reading selections for
requirement 5 will be mostly, if not entirely, nonfiction. You
are looking for facts and information. Your goal is to learn
about the world around you by reading the most accurate and
up-to-date sources you can find.
Your search probably will take you back to the library,
where you will find a great variety of materials—not only
books, but also newspapers, magazines, videos, CDs, DVDs,
maps, photographs, online resources, and more.
What Do You Want to Know?
Maybe there is some particular topic you have wanted to learn
about but have never found anybody to ask. Or perhaps there
is a topic with which you are familiar but want to know more
about. Or there is something you want to know how to do or
make. Whatever subject interests you, you’re almost certain to
find that many people have written about it.
Here are some examples of topics
many young people are curious about.
If your choice is not on the list, add it!
• Mysteries such as the Loch Ness
monster, crop circles, Stonehenge
• Fossils and dinosaurs
• Mummies and ancient Egypt
• Castles, knights, the Middle Ages
• Politics and world events
• Nations, cultures, religions
• Travel and faraway places
• Sports and athletes


30 READING
Reading for Information.
• Music, art, photography, movies
• Colleges and universities
• Careers
• Animals and nature
• Robots, computers, electronics
• Machines, automobiles, aircraft
• Artificial intelligence
• Earthquakes, volcanoes, other natural disasters
• Ocean exploration, living beneath the sea
• Asteroids, comets, near-Earth objects (NEOs)
• Astronomy, Hubble Space Telescope
• Living in space, International Space Station
• Environmental issues
• Famous people
• The outdoors, hiking, camping
• Wilderness survival
• Fitness and health
• How to deal with family issues, problems, divorce,
substance abuse
• How to handle problems of growing up, peer approval
and pressure, self-esteem
When you are
looking for specific
information, it is a
good idea to start
with the reference
librarian at your
school or public
library. Librarians
are information
professionals.
You can save a
lot of time by
simply asking for
their help.
“I cannot live
without books.
”—Thomas Jefferson,
American president


READING 31
.Reading for Information
Reading to Know
With your topic in mind, you’re ready
to find your sources and read up on it.
Here’s a look at some different resources
you might use.
Encyclopedias. A general encyclopedia
will give you basic facts or background
information about many subjects. Infor-
mation can change quickly, so use a good,
up-to-date encyclopedia, whether it’s
printed in 30 volumes or contained on
a single compact disc.
Specialized Reference Works. Reference
works, whether print or electronic, range
from almanacs, atlases, and collections of
short biographies to field guides, movie
guides, books of famous quotations, and
many more. Reference books, electronic
databases, and other general information
sources help organize vast amounts of
information to make specific facts faster
and easier to find. All libraries, large
and small, have reference sections and
staff people who know how to use
reference resources. They know what
kinds of books, indexes, directories, and
other information sources are available.
They can help you quickly narrow your
search to a few good resources.
Magazines and Newspapers. For
the most up-to-date coverage of your
subject, read articles and editorials in
magazines and newspapers. Your library
probably has a selection of general-
interest magazines and local or major
newspapers from which to choose part
of your reading for requirement 5.
“You can find
the meaning
of life in a book.
”—Nicola Yoon,
Jamaican-American author


32 READING
Reading for Information.
To find articles on your chosen subject that
have been published in popular magazines, check
the Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature. Your
library will probably have the Guide as a set of
printed books, or it may be available electronically.
To find newspaper stories about your subject,
check newspaper indexes on websites. Your
librarian can help you find newspaper indexes
to locate the newspaper articles you want.
Books. Books have been written about every
subject. Search for them using either the library
card catalog or computerized catalog as you learned
for requirement 1(b).
Internet. The internet is a vast collection of infor-
mation. Get your parent or guardian's permission to
use the internet, and then ask your parent or guard-
ian, counselor, or a librarian to help you find what
you need. They can show you how to search the
internet using web directories or search engines.
Web directories organize information by dividing
it into topics and subtopics. Directories usually have
categories such as arts, computers, entertainment,
health, news, recreation, science, and society. If you
are looking for general information on a broad topic,
start with a web directory. A directory is like a table
of contents or a subject outline for a huge book. Directories
usually display far fewer results than a search engine will, but
most of the suggested pages will directly relate to the information
you are seeking.
To use a search engine to locate information, type in key-
words, the main words that identify your subject. For example,
you might enter the keywords “Hubble Space Telescope” or
“Loch Ness monster” or “Appalachian Trail.” The search engine
then displays information about, and links to, various websites
that deal with your subject. Depending on the keywords you
use, the search engine may turn up sites that have nothing to
do with your subject. Even so, a search engine may work better
than a directory if you are looking for certain details or specific
information. A search engine is like a giant index that lists
every important word from millions of webpages.
“Knowledge
is power.
”—Sir Francis Bacon,
English philosopher
and statesman


READING 33
.Reading for Information
Getting the Facts
For requirement 3, the goal of your reading was pleasure. You
read for fun.
You will also have fun, of course, with your reading for
requirement 5. But what you are mainly after now is informa-
tion. To get it, you may dip into various sources, reading parts
of them but not reading them all cover to cover. You wouldn’t
read an entire guidebook about national parks if you’re only
interested in the part about the Everglades. You wouldn’t need
to read every article in a magazine to get the one story in it
about your chosen topic.
On the other hand, you have to pay attention when
you are reading for information. Take time to be sure you
understand what you are reading. Ask yourself:
• What key ideas and specific facts have I learned from this
article (or page, paragraph, chapter, etc.)?
• Do I understand these ideas and what
they mean?
• Do they answer my questions about
this subject?
Reread any part that is not clear to you.
Take notes to help you keep track of what
you understand and what you don’t, and to
identify which of your questions have been
answered and which have not. Something
you read may raise new questions, sending
you off to other resources in search of
the answers.
See the resources section of this pamphlet to find
some web directories and search engines you
can use to get started exploring the internet. Just
ahead there’s more information about using the
internet, plus tips for online safety, in the section
“Reading on the Internet.”


34 READING
Reading for Information.
The name may sound like a prehistoric
giant reptile, but a thesaurus is not a
type of dinosaur. It’s a dictionary that
lists synonyms (words that mean the
same thing or have similar meaning)
and antonyms (words that have
opposite meanings).
Complete
requirement 5
by discussing with
your counselor
what you have
learned from your
reading about the
world around you.
“A vocabulary is
for catching.
”—Winston Churchill,
British statesman
Reading is for fun and for discovery. As you think about
your reading for requirements 3 and 5—what’s alike about it and
what’s different—you will better understand how powerful and
all-purpose the skill of reading is. Whether you are looking to
gather facts quickly, find out how to do something, amuse
yourself on a rainy day, or lose yourself in a fabulous adventure,
you can do it because you’re a reader who knows how to read
for different reasons.
The Power of Words
Mark Twain remarked: “A powerful agent is the right word.
Whenever we come upon one of those intensely right words
in a book or a newspaper the resulting effect is physical as well
as spiritual, and electrically prompt.”
Language is rich with “intensely right words.” As you
read, whether for pleasure or to get information, be aware of
the words. If you find one you don’t know, look it up in a
dictionary or thesaurus. Keep a “cool words” list. When
you come across an interesting new word or a catchy
saying or phrase, add it to your list.
You will discover that as your vocabulary
grows, reading will become easier and more fun.
You will understand more of what you read, and
you’ll be comfortable reading material written
for any age group.


READING 35
.Reading for Information
Fill in the Blanks
You probably have spent time filling out forms
for school, for Scouting, for camp, and for other
activities. It is important to be able to read
written instructions and follow them closely,
whether you’re ordering a magazine subscription
or completing a medical history. If you make
a mistake, your magazines may go to the
wrong address, or you might get the wrong
medical treatment.
You may be filling out a paper form from a
mail-order catalog, magazine, or other printed item
such as a sales flyer, or you may need to fill out
an online order form. Whether in print or online,
always make sure to complete the order form care-
fully and accurately.
If you need to fill out
an online form, be sure
to review the “Tips
for Online Safety”
in the next chapter.
Never shop online or
do anything that costs
money, unless you
have your parent or
guardian's permission
to do so. Do not
actually place the order
unless your parent or
guardian says it is OK.





READING 37
.Reading on the Internet
Reading on the Internet
People may talk about browsing online, visiting a webpage,
surfing the net, or navigating the web, but what they really
are doing is reading. The internet, for all its dazzling graphics,
videos, click-to-play music, and other special effects, is made
up mainly of things to read. When you are online, you are
mostly reading.
URLs
If you have spent
much time online, you
probably already have
some favorite websites.
Maybe your troop or
patrol has its own
website. You might be
a frequent visitor to
the website of Scouting
America at scouting.org,
or the Scout Life site at
scoutlife.org.
The “http” or
“https” in web addresses
stands for “hypertext
transfer protocol.” It
is the set of rules (the
“protocol”) for exchanging text, images, sound, video, and other
files on the World Wide Web (the “www” in the code). The
next part of an address is the domain name. In the image above,
https://www.summitbsa.org, “summitbsa.org” is the domain.
The code “.org” specifies an organization. Other codes include
“.com” (a commercial site), “.edu” (an educational site), “.gov”
(a government site), and “.net” (a network). Most sites today
can be reached with only the domain name, like summitbsa.org.


38 READING
Reading on the Internet.
The entire address is known as a uniform resource
locator, or URL. When you type a URL (or just the domain
name) into a web browser (or click on a link in a webpage
you’re viewing), the web browser takes you to the site (the
“resource”) located at the specified address. The World Wide
Web’s huge directories of URLs help internet users quickly
find the addresses they want.
If you are using the internet as one of your sources to
complete requirement 5, ask your parent or guardian, your
counselor, or a librarian to help you find good websites that
have the information you want. The resources section of this
pamphlet also lists some useful web addresses.
If you don’t have
internet access
at home, you may
find it at your local
library, school, or
community center.
Scout Life magazine has its own website, which can be found at
scoutlife.org. There’s also a mobile app.


READING 39
.Reading on the Internet
Tips for Online Safety
On the internet, you can have fun, play games, and take care of
business. You can find help with your hobbies and interests, learn all
sorts of things, click your way to a wide world of instant information,
and even read whole books.
Along with the convenience, though, comes some risk. When you
are online, you need to be careful to guard your privacy and protect
yourself from potentially harmful situations.
These tips will help you stay safe. Your parent, guardian, counselor,
or librarian may talk with you about other rules for internet safety. When
you are at a library, you may also ask a librarian for a copy of that par-
ticular library’s internet rules.
1. Follow your family’s rules for going online. Respect any limits on how
long and how often you are allowed to be online and what sites you
can visit. Do not visit areas that are off-limits. Just as there are places
you don’t go to in real life, there are places to avoid on the internet.
2. Protect your privacy. Never exchange emails or give out information such
as your phone number, your address, your last name, where you go to
school, or where your parents or guardians work, without first asking
your parent or guardian's permission. Do not send anyone your picture
or any photos unless you have your parent or guardian's permission.
3. Do not open emails or files you receive from people you don’t know
or trust. If you get something suspicious, trash it just as you would
any other junk mail.
4. If you receive or discover any information that makes you
uncomfortable, leave it and tell your parent or guardian. Do not
respond to any message that is disturbing or hurtful.
5. Never agree to get together with someone you “meet” online, unless
your parent or guardian approves of the meeting and goes with you.
6. Never share your password with anyone (even if they sound
“official”) other than your parents, guardians or other responsible
adults in your family.
7. Never shop online unless you have permission to do so.
8. Do not believe everything you see or read online. Along with lots of
great information, the internet has lots of junk. Learn to separate
the useful from the worthless. Talk with your counselor or other
experienced web user about ways to tell the difference.
9. Be a good online citizen. Do not do anything that harms others or is
against the law.





READING 41
.Volunteering for Reading
Volunteering for Reading
For requirement 6, you are to give at least four hours of service
to activities that involve reading to others, performing volunteer
work at a library, or organizing a book swap or book drive.
Talk with your counselor about the different kinds of volunteer
service you might give.
Reading Aloud
Do you remember being read to when you were a little kid?
Did you like it?
For many people, being read to is a favorite memory from
childhood. If you have a little brother or sister, or if there are
young kids in your neighborhood or your extended family, try
reading aloud to them and see how quickly you become their
favorite big brother. Chances are, you’ll have even more fun
than they will.
Reading aloud is a different skill from reading to yourself.
To keep from losing your audience, you must read slowly. If
you’re normally a fast talker, you may have to slow down your
reading so much that—to your own ears, at least—you sound
draggy. Don’t worry. You won’t sound draggy to your listeners.
They will follow the story much better if you go slowly, say
every word, read with enthusiasm, and insert a few pauses for
dramatic effect.
Reading aloud takes practice. Before you read to an
audience (of one listener or many), practice the material
you have chosen. Be sure you can pronounce all the words,
including the characters’ names. Know where to put the
pauses. Remember to read aloud the title and the name of
the author (and the illustrator, if there is one). This reminds
your listeners where books come from—authors write them!
Your counselor
can help you
match your
interests and
abilities to the
needs of people in
your community.
Be sure to get
your parent or
guardian's
permission for
your chosen
service activity.


42 READING
Volunteering for Reading.
People of all ages enjoy hearing stories from books read
aloud. Many bookstores, libraries, book discussion clubs, and
other community groups host public readings where book lovers
read aloud from their favorites.
You might take the “read aloud” idea to a hospital, an
extended-care facility, or a local senior citizens’ home or
community center. Read to one or more of the patients or
residents. Maybe other members of your patrol or troop could
take part and make this reading service project a community
Good Turn.
Try this: If you have a tape recorder, record yourself reading a couple
of paragraphs from a book you know well. Read fast and without spirit,
like you were trying to finish quickly. Listen to the playback.
Now reread the same paragraphs. But this time, slow down. Put
feeling into the words. Vary the pace of your reading. Pause to add
suspense or a sense of anticipation. Don’t just read the sentences—
perform them. Pretend you are an actor putting on a show for an
audience. Match your tone of voice and the expression on your face
to the story you are reading.
Listen to the playback of your second reading. Which version would
you rather hear? Which version do you think your listeners would
like better?
Reading aloud is
a skill that can
bring lifetime
enjoyment.


READING 43
.Volunteering for Reading
Volunteering in a Library
Another way to fulfill requirement 6 is to volunteer in your
school or public library. Working in the library will help you
become familiar with how books are classified and arranged and
make it easier for you to find books. You also will discover other
resources available in your library, which might include CDs and
DVDs, audiobooks, maps, photo collections, genealogy and local
history collections, and computers.
As a library volunteer you might
• Mend and cover books.
• Sort materials.
• Return books to their proper places on the shelves.
• Make or update displays, bulletin boards, or scrapbooks.
• Make signs, posters, and other artwork.
• Clip newspaper articles for local history files.
• Stuff envelopes for bulk mailings.
• Help set up or clean up for book sales and other
special events.
• Help in the children’s area with crafts and other activities.
• Assist with programs.
• Guide younger students in finding library resources to help
with homework assignments.
Your school or public library probably has many positions
open for young-adult volunteers. Just ask. Most librarians are
happy to train their volunteer assistants. Experience is usually
not necessary, although computer skills are helpful for some
library positions.
Create a Little Free Library
Little Free Library is the world’s largest book-sharing
movement. It consists of book-sharing boxes that provide
24/7 access to books. Studies show that the more books in or
near the home, the more likely a child will learn and love to
read—but that most children living in poverty have no books
to call their own. Through this program millions of books are
exchanged each year, free of charge, increasing access to books
for readers of all ages and backgrounds. Go to
go.scoutlife.org/LFL for details.
Working in a
library is a fun
way to meet
people. Volunteers
at public libraries
might range in
age from 12 to
past 90, and they
come from all
walks of life.
One thing most
of them have in
common is a love
of reading.


44 READING
Reading Resources.
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Stories for Around the Campfire; More
Stories for Around the Campfire
Book Lists
Book lists or reading lists are put
together every year by readers,
librarians, and others who know
books. Your school or public library
will have lists to get you started.
Many lists are published on the web;
the internet address of some are given
here. Also ask your librarian or teacher
for a list of books that have won (or
are competing for) your state’s awards
for children’s and young adult books.
American Library Association:
Best Books for Young Adults
ala.org/yalsa/booklists/bbya
Education World: Summer
Reading Lists
educationworld.com/summer_reading
International Literacy Association
Reading Lists
literacyworldwide.org/get-resources/
reading-lists
Newbery Medal Winners and
Honor Books
ala.org/alsc/awardsgrants/
bookmedia/newberymedal/
newberymedal
TeachersFirst.com: 100 Best Books
teachersfirst.com/100books.cfm
Young Adult Books Central
yabookscentral.com
Little Free Libraries
How to create a library:
littlefreelibrary.org/starting-a-little-free-
library-boy-scout-success-stories
Little Free Library Eagle Scout project:
littlefreelibrary.org/2019/07/library-
build-case-study-eagle-scout-project/
Scout Life magazine building plans:
go.scoutlife.org/LFL
Reading Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


READING 45
.Reading Resources
Books Online
Many classic books are available online
for no charge. Several websites have
free e-books (electronic books) that you
can read on a computer or print out to
read later. The websites listed here offer
hundreds of e-books.
The Online Books Page
digital.library.upenn.edu/books
Project Gutenberg
gutenberg.org
Magazines
Readers your age can choose from many
magazines published especially for you.
Some of these magazines also publish
stories and articles written by young
people. Check your school or public
library for these and other magazines.
Scout Life
P.O. Box 152401
Irving, TX 75015-2401
866-584-6589
scoutlife.org
Subscribe to Scout Life through your
Scout unit or use promo code SLMBP15
online for a special half-price discount
Cricket (ages 9 to 14)
1751 Pinnacle Drive, Suite 600
McLean, VA 22102
703-885-3400
cricketmedia.com
Kids Discover
192 Lexington Ave., Suite 1003
New York, NY 10016-6913
212-677-4457
kidsdiscover.com
Skipping Stones
P.O. Box 3939
Eugene, OR 97403
541-342-4956
skippingstones.org
Stone Soup: The Magazine
by Young Writers & Artists
P.O. Box 83
Santa Cruz, CA 95063
800-447-4569
stonesoup.com
Newspapers
Ask your merit badge counselor or a
librarian to help you find newspaper
articles on subjects that interest you.
Below is one website that contains
online newspaper indexes. Your
librarian can show you how to search
for articles using this or other indexes.
Refdesk.com
refdesk.com/paper.html


46 READING
Reading Resources.
Reference Books
Check the reference section of your
school or public library for these and
many other useful reference books.
Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges.
Barron’s Educational Series, annual.
Books in Print. Bowker, annual.
Contemporary Authors. Gale, annual.
Current Biography. H.W. Wilson, annual.
Guinness World Records. Bantam
Books, annual.
Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature.
H.W. Wilson, annual.
Subject Guide to Books in Print.
Bowker, annual.
Subject Guide to Children’s Books in
Print. Bowker, annual.
Organizations and Websites
Ask your counselor, parent or guardian,
or librarian to recommend web-related
guides, directories, and search engines
that are good for internet users your age.
Bookshare
bookshare.org
Internet Search Engines for Kids
ivyjoy.com/rayne/kidssearch.html
Literacy Programs
Hundreds of organizations promote
literacy. Here are a few of the major
programs. Through them you may find
local opportunities.
National Literacy Directory
nld.org
American Foundation for the Blind
1401 South Clark St., Suite 730
Arlington, VA 22202
800-232-5463
afb.org
The Barbara Bush Foundation
for Family Literacy
516 N. Adams St.
Tallahassee, FL 32301
850-562-5300
barbarabush.org
Read Across America
National Education Association
1201 16th St., NW
Washington, DC 20036-3290
202-833-4000
readacrossamerica.org
Bookshare has signed a memorandum of mutual support with Scouting America
that emphasizes an ongoing relationship to provide Scouts and their leaders
access to an electronic library of key Scouting publications. Individuals with
disabilities can have resources like the Scouts BSA handbook and dozens of
merit badge pamphlets at their fingertips—on their PCs, smartphones, and
e-readers via audiobooks, or can hear books being read as words are highlighted
on a screen. These resources can even be accessed using a Braille “reader”—a
display that can be hooked up to a computer to generate a Braille translation.
For more about Bookshare and its agreement with Scouting America, go to
blog.scoutingmagazine.org/2011/09/28/bookshare-bsa-open-a-new-chapter.


READING 47
.Reading Resources
Reading Is Fundamental Inc.
750 First St., NE, Suite 920
Washington, DC 20002
877-743-7323
rif.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks the follow-
ing organizations and individuals for
their help in preparing this edition and
previous editions of the Reading merit
badge pamphlet and the requirements:
• Burlington County Council Reading
Merit Badge Task Force, Rancocas,
New Jersey
• Children’s Book Council
• Deborah J. Lightfoot, author
and editor
• Jaye McLaughlin, Youth Center
Manager, Fort Worth Public Library
• Christine McNew, Youth Services
consultant, Texas State Library
• Puget Sound Council for Reviewing
Children’s Media
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.


48 READING
Reading Resources.
Photo Credits
Bedford, Texas, Public Library,
courtesy—cover (library cards)
and page 24
Darrell Byers—page 36
Doug Knutson—cover (Scout);
pages 4, 12, 19, 22, 23, 28, 35, 40,
and 43
Brian Payne—page 15
Randy Piland—page 14
All other photos are royalty-free stock
images or are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.