SCOUT RANK REQUIREMENTS
All requirements for the Scout rank must be completed as a member
of a troop. If you have already completed these requirements as part of the
Webelos Scouting Adventure, simply demonstrate your knowledge or skills
to your Scoutmaster or other designated leader after joining the troop.
 LEADER
INITIAL
& DATE
1a. Repeat from memory the Scout Oath, Scout Law, Scout motto, and Scout
slogan. In your own words, explain their meaning. (See pages 11–18.)
1b. Explain what Scout spirit is. Describe some ways you have shown Scout spirit
by practicing the Scout Oath, Scout Law, Scout motto, and Scout slogan.
(See page 15.)
1c. Demonstrate the Scout sign, salute, and handshake. Explain when they
should be used. (See pages 18–19.)
1d. Describe the First Class Scout badge and tell what each part stands for.
Explain the significance of the First Class Scout badge. (See pages 19–20.)
1e. Repeat from memory the Outdoor Code. List the seven principles of Leave
No Trace. Explain the difference between the two. (See pages 223–224.)
1f. Repeat from memory the Pledge of Allegiance. In your own words, explain
its meaning. (See page 60.)
2. After attending at least one Scout troop meeting, do the following:
2a. Describe how the Scouts in the troop provide its leadership. (See pages 42–44.)
2b. Describe the four steps of Scout advancement. (See pages 413–417.)
2c. Describe what the Scouts BSA ranks are and how they are earned.
(See pages 27 and 413–417.)
2d. Describe what merit badges are and how they are earned.
(See pages 418–420.)
3a. Explain the patrol method. Describe the types of patrols that are used in
your troop. (See page 25.)
3b. Become familiar with your patrol name, emblem, flag, and yell. Explain
how these items create patrol spirit. (See page 26.)
4a. Show how to tie a square knot, two half-hitches, and a taut-line hitch.
Explain how each knot is used. (See pages 365–367.)
4b. Show the proper care of a rope by learning how to whip and fuse the
ends of different kinds of rope. (See pages 361–362.)
5. Tell what you need to know about using a pocketknife safely and
responsibly. (See pages 379–381.)
6a. With your parent or guardian, complete the exercises in the pamphlet How
to Protect Your Children from Child Abuse: A Parent’s Guide.
6b. With your parent or guardian’s permission, view the Personal Safety
Awareness videos.1 (See the pamphlet inserted inside the front cover.)
7. Since joining the troop and while working on the Scout rank, participate in
a Scoutmaster conference. (See page 418.)
Notes: The requirements for Scout, Tenderfoot, Second Class, and First Class ranks may be worked
on simultaneously; however, these ranks must be earned in sequence.
1 If your family does not have internet access at home AND you do not have ready internet access at school or
another public place or via a mobile device, the Personal Safety Awareness videos portion of this requirement
may be waived by your Scoutmaster in consultation with your parent or guardian.
Alternative requirements for the Scout rank are available for Scouts with physical or mental disabilities if they
meet the criteria listed in the Scouts BSA Requirements book.
441
RANK REQUIREMENTS