SCUBA
DIVING
STEM-Based


“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
SCUBA DIVING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES


FPO
Note to the Counselor
Counselors for the Scuba Diving merit badge must be registered
with Scouting America and be approved by the district or
council advancement committee. Scuba Diving counselors are
not required to be diving instructors. However, the merit badge
requirement for earning an open water diver certification must
be done under the supervision of a recognized diving instructor.
Like other merit badges, Scuba Diving has been developed
to teach and train youth in a manner consistent with the goals
and values of Scouting America. The merit badge counselor
should be fair and consistent when presenting and evaluating
the knowledge and skills specified by the requirements. None of
the requirements may be modified or omitted.
Unlike many other merit badges, the Scuba Diving critical
prerequisites, knowledge, and skills are not itemized in the
requirements nor adequately covered in this pamphlet. The
requirement to earn Open Water Diver Certification means the
Scout must meet training requirements set by outside agencies
and must supplement the material in this pamphlet with an
entry-level scuba diver manual.
All phases of scuba instruction—classroom, pool, and open
water—must comply with the minimum training standards
for entry-level scuba certification adopted by the American
National Standards Institute (ANSI) or the U.S. Recreational
Scuba Training Council (RSTC). The RSTC is recognized as the
ANSI Accredited Standards Developer for recreational diving
instructional standards. Scouting America acknowledges those
standards by limiting scuba instruction only to instructors
trained and sanctioned by recognized scuba agencies.
Scouting America scuba diving policy is applicable to
scuba training/certification courses and recreational diving
activities by Scouting America members. In addition, council
programs are subject to Scouting America national camp
standards. Scouting America recognizes industry standards
All scuba instruction must be conducted by recreational
diving instructors in good standing with a scuba agency
recognized by Scouting America and approved by the
Scouting America local council.
35969
ISBN 978-0-8395-5969-6
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing


SCUBA DIVING 3
and implements them by using outside agencies for training
and certification. Introductory scuba programs conducted in a
swimming pool only must at a minimum meet the requirements
set forth by the instructor’s recognized scuba training agency.
Any diver possessing, displaying, or using scuba (self-
contained underwater breathing apparatus) in connection with
any Scouting-related activity must be either under the direct
supervision of a recognized diving instructor or currently
certified by a recognized agency. Any introductory scuba
experience program or training/certification course must be
conducted by a recognized diving instructor.
A recognized professional divemaster or instructor is any
currently certified (renewed) divemaster or instructor in good
standing with an agency recognized by the RSTC (Recreational
Scuba Training Council), who has professional liability insurance
and is approved by the local Scouting America council.
Recreational diving activities by Scouting America groups
whose members are currently certified must be directly
supervised by a responsible adult currently certified (renewed)
as a divemaster, assistant instructor, or higher rating from a
recognized agency. Dive environments, equipment, depths,
procedures, supervision, and buddy assignments must be
consistent with each individual’s certification.
Because dives by recreational divers may be infrequent,
the divemaster or instructor supervising a Scouting America
scuba activity should screen participants prior to open water
activities and provide remedial instruction and practice as
appropriate. Such remedial instruction and practice should be in
accordance with the policies and standards of the divemaster’s
or instructor’s agency for Scuba Review, Scuba Refresher, or
similar program.
Agencies recognized by Scouting
America for scuba training:
• PADI (Professional Association of
Diving Instructors)
• NAUI (National Association of
Underwater Instructors)
• SSI (Scuba Schools International)
• IDEA (International Diving
Educators Association)
• PDIC (Professional Diving
Instructors Corporation)
Information on
merit badge
counselors
and Scouting
America scuba
policies, including
restrictions and
protocols for
divers under
15 years of age,
may be found at
www.scouting.org.


4 SCUBA DIVING
• SDI/TDI (Scuba Diving International)
• YMCA Scuba Program (discontinued in 2008,
but certification cards are still recognized)
• NASDS (National Association of Scuba Diving Schools
(merged with SSI, but certification cards still recognized)
• IANTD (International Association of Nitrox and Technical
Divers)
• RAID (Rebreather Association of International Divers)
• SNSI (Scuba and Nitrox Safety International)
• NASE (National Academy of Scuba Educators)
In addition to the agencies listed, any current member of
the World Recreational Scuba Training Council (WRSTC), which
includes all RSTC members are also recognized.
Each approved instructor must follow the training protocols
established by his or her authorizing agency, including
limitations and special provisions based on medical conditions,
Scouting America medical considerations, and age. For divers
under age 15, this will include restrictions for maximum depth,
buddies, and supervision ratios.
Youth members registered in Cub Scout programs are not
authorized to use scuba in any activity.
Registered members of Scouts BSA and older Scouting
America youth programs (age 11 and above) may participate in
introductory scuba programs and scuba certification programs
conducted by recognized agencies appropriate to their age and
current level of certification.
Members of Scouting America programs, based on age,
may participate in recreational group dives as unit, district, or
council activities, provided such dives are consistent with their
certifications and under direct supervision of a responsible adult
currently certified as a divemaster, assistant instructor, or higher
rating from a recognized agency. Standards of the recognized
scuba agencies require students for open water certification
programs to be at least 15 years of age but allow special
certification programs for younger students.
Since all instruction for Scouting America scuba programs
must be conducted by professionals certified by a recognized
agency, additional agency-specific, age-related restrictions and
protocols apply to students under 15 years of age.
The divemaster or instructor supervising a recreational dive
by a Scouting America group must implement the following
policies. Additional restrictions and protocols from the certifying
agency may apply:


SCUBA DIVING 5
• Depths are limited to 40 feet for divers under 12 years of
age and to 60 feet for divers 12 to 14 years of age.
• Additional divemasters or instructors are present to
maintain a ratio of 1 trained supervisor to 4 buddy pairs (eight
divers) containing one to four divers under 15 years of age.
• In addition to the divemaster or trained supervisor, each
diver under age 15 must have an assigned adult diver who is
certified as an open water diver or higher rating as part of the
dive group. It is recommended that no more than 3 youth under
15 years of age may dive with the assigned adult diver.
Note: The 8:1 youth to trained supervisor ratio is a
maximum ratio and should be reduced based upon weather,
water conditions including current, surface conditions and
visibility, participants comfort and skill level and the ability of
the divemaster or instructor to control the group.
When scuba diving is taught in connection with any local
council program, such as offering the Scuba Diving merit badge
at summer camp, instructors should provide the training on a
contract basis. Such instructors should have dive store or other
commercial affiliation that provides liability coverage. Direct
employment of scuba instructors is not recommended.
Local council programs may not compress or sell air
for scuba use, or sell, rent, or loan scuba equipment (scuba
cylinders, regulators, gauges, dive computers, weights, BCDs).
All air and scuba equipment for local council use must
be obtained from professional sources (dive stores, resorts,
dive boats, etc.) affiliated with a scuba agency recognized by
Scouting America.
Diving using surface-supplied air systems is not authorized
in connection with any Scouting America activity or facility
except when done under contract by commercial divers.
Medical Considerations
Each scuba training agency recognized by Scouting America
requires a specific health history form be completed prior to
enrollment in a certification program (e.g., RSTC Diver Medical
Participant Questionnaire). Scouting America requires review
and approval of the completed form by a physician. Various
risk factors may exclude a person from scuba training, either
temporarily or permanently. Risk factors include, but are not
limited to, ear and sinus problems, recent surgery, spontaneous
pneumothorax, asthma or reactive airway disease (RAD),


6 SCUBA DIVING
seizure disorders, diabetes, cardiac disorders, leukemia, sickle-
cell disorder, pregnancy, panic disorders, and active psychosis.
The divemaster or instructor supervising a Scouting
America recreational scuba activity/introductory scuba
program must review the annual health information (i.e.,
Scouting America AHMR and RSTC Diver Medical Participant
Questionnaire) and evaluate risk conditions using medical
standards consistent with those used by his or her certifying
agency and Scouting America. Additional tests or physician
consultations may be required to confirm fitness for diving.
Consultation with medical specialists knowledgeable
about diving medicine (Divers Alert Network’s 24-hour hotline)
may be needed. If the scuba activity is conducted as part of
a council program; approval to dive is also subject to review
and confirmation by the camp health officer and/or medical
director/council health supervisor.
The following medical contraindications are based on
Scouting America operational considerations and may be more
conservative than those listed in the “Diving Medical Guidance
to the Physician.”
1. Diabetes Mellitus. Diabetes must be well-controlled.
Hypoglycemia can lead to unconsciousness and drowning.
Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is prohibited
for the following:
a. For persons under age 18 with the diagnosis
of diabetes.
b. Persons using insulin to control diabetes.
c. Persons with diabetes, who are non-insulin dependent
and who have had recurrent problems and/or
hospitalizations for diabetic problems.
d. Persons with any HbA1c test greater than 7.0 in the
previous 12 months.
e. Persons having a documented or suspected
hypoglycemic event requiring treatment or assessment
in the previous 12 months.
Diabetes is considered well-controlled when the following
are met:
a. The acceptable oral medications for diabetic control are
as single agents only: metformin and metformin
analogs; DPP-4 inhibitors (sitagliptin, vildagliptin,
alogliptin, saxagliptin and linagliptin); or SGLT2
inhibitors and analogies.


SCUBA DIVING 7
b. Persons who control their diabetes with exercise and
diet (without the aid of medication, except metformin)
and document HbA1c test value less than 7.0 in the last
6 months) may be approved to scuba dive.
2. Seizures or Epilepsy. Seizures while snorkeling or
scuba diving are extremely dangerous and often fatal.
• Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is
prohibited for participants with a history of seizures.
• Prospective participants with a history of infant febrile
seizures may be considered for diving after formal
consultation with a neurologist.
3. Asthma or Reactive Airway Disease.
• Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is
prohibited for persons being treated for asthma or
reactive airway disease.
• Persons with a history of asthma who have been
asymptomatic and have not used medications to
control asthma for 5 years or more may be allowed
to scuba dive if resolution of asthma is specifically
confirmed by their physician and includes provocative
pulmonary function testing. Provocative testing can
include exercise, hypertonic saline, hyperpnea test, etc.
4. Psychological and Emotional Difficulties (ADD, ADHD,
anxiety, and depression). Any condition should be well-controlled.
Many medications are not compatible with scuba diving.
Diving as part of an official Scouting activity is prohibited
for the following:
a. Participants taking more than one medication for any
of these conditions.
b. Participants with anxiety disorder requiring any
medication.
5. Severe Risk Factors. Diving as part of an official scouting
activity is prohibited for persons with conditions listed as “severe”
by the Undersea & Hyperbaric Medical Society (UHMS). See:
UHMS Diving Medical Guidance to the Physician (2020).
Youth, parents, dive supervisors, and physicians with
questions or concerns about diving with specific medical
conditions should consult the UHMS Diving Medical Guidance
to the Physician, Recreational Scuba Training Council (RSTC)
and the Divers Alert Network (DAN). DAN medical professionals
are available for non-emergency consultation by telephone at
919-684-2948 during business hours or via email.


8 SCUBA DIVING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Scuba-Diving or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
Scouting America is not a dive certification agency.
Your merit badge counselor can help you find a scuba
agency recognized by Scouting America scuba policy so
that you can fulfill requirement 4.
Scouts who have already earned an Open Water
Diver Certification outside of a Scouting America
activity from a scuba agency recognized by Scouting
America scuba policy may still earn the Scuba Diving
merit badge by earning the Swimming merit badge and
completing all other listed requirements.


SCUBA DIVING 9
Minimum Course Content for Open Water
Diver Certification
The following abbreviated list represents the RSTC “Minimum Course
Content for Open Water Diver Certification.” It is not intended as a complete
outline of learning objectives for an Open Water Diver course. Development
of learning objectives is left to the respective training agencies.
During the Open Water Diver course you can look forward to learning
basic scuba theory and developing entry-level scuba skills required for cer-
tification. All scuba instruction must meet the minimum training standards
for Entry-Level Scuba Certification set by the Recreational Scuba Training
Council (RSTC). Your course will consist of the topics and scuba skills
required by the training organization and as outlined in this section.
At a minimum, the following will be covered.
Equipment. Learn the physical description,
operating principles, maintenance, and use of
the following equipment items—face mask,
fins, snorkel, BCD, exposure suit, weights
and weight system, float and flag, cylinders,
valves, regulators/air-delivery system,
submersible pressure gauge, alternate
air source, timing device, compass,
depth gauge, dive table or dive
computers, knife.
1. Physics of Diving. Learn the physical
principles of matter and their application
to diving activities and hazards.


10 SCUBA DIVING
2. Medical Problems Related to Diving. Learn the causes, symptoms,
prevention, and first-aid and treatment of diving medical problems.
3. Decompression Theory and Use of Dive Tables and/or Dive Computers.
Learn how to determine no-decompression limits for single and
repetitive dives, plus how to use dive tables and/or dive computers
to properly plan and execute a dive.
4. Dive Environment. Learn information on the local and general
conditions of the diving environment and their
possible effects on the diver.
5. General Topics. Learn infor-
mation on dive planning,
underwater and surface com-
munications, diver assistance,
recommended diving practices
(including safety stops),
procedures for diving from
boats, proper use of personal
diving logbook, and local dive
regulations and protocols.
6. Pool/Confined Water Scuba Skills.
Learn and practice the following scuba skills in a pool or confined water.
• Diving system assembly and disassembly
• Equipment inspection (at water’s edge)
• Entries and exits
• Proper weighting
• Mouthpiece clearing—snorkel and regulator
• Regulator/snorkel exchanges at the surface
• Controlled descents and ascents
• Underwater swimming
• Mask-clearing, including removal and replacement
• Underwater exercises—with and without mask
• Buddy-system techniques
• Underwater and surface buoyancy control
• Underwater problem-solving (regulator recovery/retrieval, etc.)
• Surface-snorkel swimming with full diving system
• Surface operation of the quick release/emergency function of the
weight system


SCUBA DIVING 11
• Underwater removal and replacement of scuba system
• Underwater removal and replacement of the weight/ballast system
• Out-of-air emergency alternatives, including at least one dependent
procedure and one independent procedure
• Equipment care and maintenance (at water’s edge)
7. Open Water Scuba Skills. Perform the following scuba skills
while diving in open water.
• Equipment inspection (at water’s edge)
• Entries and exits
• Proper Weighting
• Mouthpiece clearing—snorkel and regulator
• Regulator/snorkel exchanges at the surface
• Controlled descents and ascents
• Underwater swimming
• Mask-clearing
• Buddy-system techniques
• Underwater and surface buoyancy control
• Diver assistance techniques (self/buddy)
• Surface-snorkel swimming with full diving system
• Removal and replacement of weight/ballast system
• Removal and replacement of scuba system
• Out-of-air emergency alternatives
• Equipment care and maintenance (at water’s edge)
• Underwater navigation
Scouting America’s Scuba Award is an introductory experience. It
introduces qualified Scouts BSA, Venturing, and registered adult
participants to the special skills, equipment, and safety precautions
associated with scuba diving. The Scuba Award experience consists of
two parts—knowledge development and skills development. There are no
open water dives included.
A scuba instructor teaching through a Scouting America-recognized
scuba agency conducts water skills development in a clear, confined
water environment. Certain portions of the Scuba Award experience
may apply to the Scuba Diving merit badge at the discretion of the merit
badge counselor and open water scuba instructor. The Scuba Award is not
a scuba certification program.





SCUBA DIVING 13
Contents
Safe Scuba Diving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
The Adventure of Scouts BSA Scuba Diving . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
The History of Scuba . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Essential Scuba Equipment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Adjusting to the Underwater World . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Essential Diving Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Dive Equipment for Adventurers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Exploring the Ocean Planet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Gaining Diving Experience . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Diving-Related Career Opportunities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93
Scuba Diving Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98


14 SCUBA DIVING
Safe Scuba Diving.
Safe Scuba Diving
Safe scuba diving demands respect—respect for the potential
power of the aquatic realm, your abilities, and your dive buddy’s
safety. Scuba diving safely is a matter of learning the important
knowledge of safe diving, practicing your skills, and using good
judgment. You will learn how to become a safe scuba diver by
reading this pamphlet and completing your Open Water Diver
Scuba Certification course.
Swimming Skills
To be a safe diver, you must have good swimming
skills. Scouting America swimmer test evaluates the
skills needed for the minimum level of swimming
ability required for safe deep-water swimming, a
safety factor necessary for scuba diving.
Safe Scuba Diving
Safe scuba diving demands respect—respect for
the aquatic realm’s power, your abilities, and your
dive buddy’s safety. Scuba diving safely is a mat-
ter of learning the important knowledge of safe
diving, practicing your skills, and using good
judgment. You will learn how to become a safe
diver by reading this pamphlet and completing
your Open Water Diver scuba certification course.
The Scouting America Swimmer Test
Jump feetfirst into water over your head in depth. Level off and swim
75 yards in a strong manner using one or more of the following strokes:
sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen, or crawl. Then swim 25 yards using an
easy resting backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed without any
stops and must include at least one sharp turn. After completing the
swim, rest by floating. This qualification test should be renewed annually.


SCUBA DIVING 15
.Safe Scuba Diving
The complete text
of Safety Afloat
can be found in the
Scouting America
publication
Guide to Safe
Scouting, available
online at
www.scouting.org.
Safe Swim Defense Applied to Scuba Diving
You should recall Safe Swim Defense from Second Class and
Swimming merit badge requirements. Scuba diving is an
advanced activity, so the basic safety rules for swimming apply.
However, the greater freedom that comes from carrying your
own air supply also adds more risks, so you will learn additional
safety rules and skills during scuba training. To get started, here
is how Safe Swim Defense points apply to scuba diving.
1. Qualified Supervision. All swimming and scuba activities
must be supervised by a mature and conscientious adult who
is trained in planning and conducting a safe activity, includ-
ing how to reduce risk and respond during emergencies.
Your instructor will provide this supervision during your
Scuba Diving merit badge training. After you complete
your Open Water Diver Certification, you can participate
in dives with similarly trained Scouts provided the activity
is supervised by a Divemaster or Instructor.
2. Personal Health Review. You will be required to complete a
special health history. Some conditions may require additional
review by a physician beyond your normal Scouting America
exam to ensure you can safely participate in scuba training.
Please review Scouting America Medical Considerations found
at the end of this section. After certification, you may need to
restrict diving activities depending on changes in your health,
for example, if you have sinus congestion.
3. Safe Area. Your Scuba Diving merit badge instruction will
cover items such as water clarity, depth, temperature, currents,
and marine life that provide a safe diving environment. Your
Open Water Diver Certification will not prepare you for special
situations that require more training, such as extended deep
diving, wreck diving, cave diving, or ice diving.
4. Response Personnel (lifeguards). Lifeguards are expected
to stop unsafe activities and to perform rescues if necessary.
The instructor serves those functions during your scuba
training. However, consider a swimming activity where all
the swimmers are also lifeguards. That situation applies to
scuba diving. Your scuba training will include accident pre-
vention and emergency response, so there typically is no
need for additional “lifeguards.” Since each member of a dive
group provides backup for the others, especially his or her
buddy, you should never dive with anyone who is not certified.


16 SCUBA DIVING
Safe Scuba Diving.
5. Lookout (surface support personnel). If you take a dive
boat to a remote diving location, then it is a good idea to
leave personnel on the boat to watch the weather and boat
traffic and to respond during a dive emergency. During a
drift dive, divers follow a current and may finish the dive a
considerable distance from where they started. Either a sin-
gle dive boat, or small tenders from a live-aboard vessel,
may follow the group and be ready to quickly pick up divers
who may end the dive before others.
6. Ability (skill proficiency). The standard 100-yard Scouting
America swimmer test defines the minimum ability needed
for safe swimming in deep water. However, the in-water com-
fort level demonstrated by those who earn the Swimming
merit badge is a better starting level for scuba training.
Your Scuba Diving merit badge instructor will specify
what your Open Water Diver Certification prepares you for,
and what it does not. Additional training is available for more
demanding environments. Note that there is no expiration
date for your scuba certification. Some recreational divers
will take several dives during and just after their certification
course and not dive again for a long time. Those divers may
need a refresher course to make sure their skills are current.
7. Buddy System. Every scuba
diver must have a certified
buddy underwater at all
times. Buddies check each
other’s equipment prior
to a dive and continuously
monitor each other
while underwater.
8. Discipline. All participants
should know, understand,
and respect the rules and
procedures for safe scuba
diving. It is important to have a
“tailgate” review just prior to each dive
to review basics, such as underwater signals, entry
techniques, and procedures for reuniting in case of
separation, as well as the specifics of the current dive
plan and emergency procedures for the site.
All Scouts working
toward the Scuba
Diving merit badge
must earn the
Swimming merit
badge prior to
fulfilling require-
ments 3 through
6. Once you have
presented proof
of having earned
your Swimming
merit badge to
your Scuba Diving
merit badge
counselor, you
may begin working
on requirements
3 through 6.


SCUBA DIVING 17
.Safe Scuba Diving
Additional Considerations for Safe Scuba Diving
9. Equipment. During swimming, you rely mainly on skill in a
safe swim environment to keep yourself safe. During scuba
diving, you must also rely on complicated equipment. Your
regulator reduces the very high pressure in your tank to the
pressure you need to breathe at a given depth. Your dive
computer monitors your time and depth to avoid the need
for decompression. Your pressure gauge indicates how much
air you have left. Your mask makes it easier to see. Failure of
any of these items, plus others, can range from inconvenience
to dangerous. It is important that you understand how to
check your equipment, and that of your buddy, prior to each
and every dive. Your instructor will check equipment for you
during training and show you how to check your own prior
to your open water training dives.
10. Maturity. Scouting America policies encourage Tiger Cubs to
learn to swim, but they may not take Open Water Scuba
Certification courses. The reason lies in maturity.
You don’t have to worry that scuba diving will stunt
physical growth. However, a person’s ability to recognize risk
and handle stress improves with age. Buddies rely on those
qualities in each other. Because of concerns about emotional
maturity, scuba agencies recognized by Scouting America
place restrictions on open water certifications for youth 11-14.
If you fall in the 11- to 14-year-old age group, you are
still encouraged to follow your interest and complete the
Scuba Diving merit badge. The skills you learn and experi-
ences you gain will help you obtain the confidence and poise
that mark your transition to an adult. Learning to dive is
great fun and a lifelong opportunity. However, you need to
understand that your certification card will have restrictions,
such as a limited depth range and the need to dive with a
certified parent or other certified adult as a buddy. (During
Scouting America scuba diving activities, Scouting America
Youth Protection rules will apply.) For safety’s sake, you
need to honor such restrictions, but you should consider
them as steppingstones toward safe and enjoyable adven-
tures rather than stumbling blocks.
You may face similar situations as you get older, such
as driving restrictions based on age in states that have gradu-
ated driving license programs. That doesn’t mean you should
delay learning to drive, or to scuba dive.


18 SCUBA DIVING
Safe Scuba Diving.
11. Medical considerations. You may have one or more medical
issues that may prevent you from scuba diving. Discuss with
your counselor if you have diabetes, epilepsy or seizures,
asthma or reactive airway disease, psychological or emotional
difficulties (ADD, ADHD, anxiety, and depression), or any
severe health condition.
The Scuba Diver’s Code
A Scout:
• Maintains good mental and physical fitness for
scuba diving.
• Keeps dive skills sharp through continuing education.
• Seeks professional orientation prior to diving at
unfamiliar dive locations.
• Seeks training prior to attempting specialized types
of diving—such as night diving, cavern and cave
diving, wreck diving, and deep diving.
• Adheres to the buddy system throughout every dive.
• Uses and is familiar with complete, well-maintained,
and reliable equipment.
• Always dives no deeper than the recommended
depth for his or her certification level, experience
and Scouting America age requirement.
• Always follows the time limits listed by special dive
tables or a dive computer for a particular depth.
• Is a S.A.F.E. diver—Slowly Ascends From Every
dive—and makes a safety stop at 15 feet for three
minutes at the end of each dive prior to surfacing.
• Breathes properly while diving, never holding a
breath or skipping breathing.
• Knows and obeys local diving laws and regulations,
including fish and game laws and dive-flag laws.
• Understands and respects aquatic life, considers how
human interactions affect it, and dives carefully to
protect fragile aquatic ecosystems.


SCUBA DIVING 19
.Safe Scuba Diving
Scuba Diving First Aid
Following the 10 points of Safe Swim Defense (as applied to
Scuba Diving) and the Scuba Diver’s Code will help prevent
many accidents in your diving activities, but some injuries could
still occur. Take appropriate precautions and become familiar
with first-aid techniques and steps to follow if health concerns
arise while you are out on the water. Below are some of the
most common first-aid situations that might occur while
scuba diving.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature falls
below the normal range. Exposure to cold, or even cool, water
can lower your core temperature dangerously, especially when
combined with wind, exhaustion, or hunger. Early signals of
heat loss include shivering and bluish lips. Further cooling may
result in loss of muscle strength and coordination. It may
become difficult to think clearly or do simple tasks. In severe
stages, shivering will stop and unconsciousness will follow.
At this stage, death is possible unless treatment is received.
Anyone who starts to shiver or shows discoloration around
the lips or cheeks should immediately be taken out of the water,
thoroughly dried, put in dry clothing or wrapped in blankets,
and moved to a warm place. If no warm shelter or other heat
sources are available, press the victim close to one or more
persons to transfer heat through direct skin contact. Minimize
the victim’s movement and call for medical aid.


20 SCUBA DIVING
Safe Scuba Diving.
Squeezes
Natural air spaces such as the body’s sinuses and ears or artifi-
cial air spaces (e.g., diving masks) respond readily to the
underwater environment, as long as you equalize them to the
surrounding pressure. A scuba diver may be injured by failing to
equalize these air spaces, either while descending or ascending.
Any air space can suffer a pressure injury during ascent
or descent. Descending pressure injuries are called squeezes.
Ascending pressure injuries are called reverse squeezes, reverse
blocks, or expansion injuries. You easily can avoid these pressure
injuries by equalizing early and often while descending. (See the
chapter “Adjusting to the Underwater World” for a discussion of
specific techniques to use to avoid squeezes.) If you get a sinus
squeeze, see a doctor if you experience significant pain, pain over
a long period of time, or complications in healing.
Decompression Illness
Decompression illness refers to both decompression sickness and
lung overexpansion injuries as a single condition. Primarily,
decompression sickness may occur when a diver exceeds time
limits for specific depths as set forth by dive tables or a dive
computer. When present, these secondary factors can contribute
to decompression sickness: fatigue, dehydration, vigorous
exercise (before, during, or after the dive), coldness, age,
illness, injuries, and being overweight. Lung overexpansion
injuries may result if a diver fails to breathe normally or exhale
during an ascent.
Never dive with
a cold, allergy,
or even mild
congestion.
Avoid forceful
equalization. If
you feel sinus pain
while descending,
stop your descent
and end the dive.
Hyperventilation
Hyperventilation is the result of overbreathing—either
deliberately or because of panic. The likely result of
hyperventilation is dizziness and fainting, and victims will
feel as if they are being suffocated. Such a condition is
unlikely in diving if the participants are properly prepared
for each new skill level. If a diver shows signs of panic
at any time, bring that person back into the boat or onto
shore, calm the person, and encourage slow breathing.
Make sure the person rests in a comfortable position
and has plenty of open, fresh air. Before resuming any
activity, find out and resolve the cause of the panic.


SCUBA DIVING 21
.Safe Scuba Diving
A diver with decompression illness may experience symp-
toms such as unusual fatigue, dizziness, vertigo, shortness of
breath, tingling of the skin, numbness, and pain or paralysis in
the muscles and/or joints of the arms, legs, or torso. Itchy skin,
difficulty urinating, and ringing in the ears also can be symptoms
of decompression illness. Signs of decompression illness you
may observe in your diving buddy could be a blotchy skin rash,
confusion, or odd behavior. Other indicators include muscle
weakness or paralysis, tremors, staggering, and coughing up
blood. A diver with decompression illness may even collapse or
become unconscious.
First aid for decompression illness includes immediately
calling for assistance and getting the victim to a hospital
and recompression chamber. Immediate care by a doctor
is most important. While waiting for medical assistance,
monitor the diver’s airway, breathing, and circulation
(ABCs). Your counselor/dive instructor will be trained
in oxygen administration and will have the appropriate
equipment. He or she will administer as close to 100
percent oxygen to the patient as possible.
To prevent decompression illness, never hold your breath when
using any form of underwater scuba equipment. Further, ascend
slowly after every dive, never exceeding 60 feet per minute, or
the maximum allowed by a dive computer. Always use dive
tables and dive computers to plan your dives conservatively,
well within depth and time limits.
Nitrogen Narcosis
Deeper diving can cause a problem that relates to gases dissolv-
ing into a diver’s blood and reaching the nervous system. This
can trigger an anesthetic effect called nitrogen narcosis that may
cause a diver to make poor judgments and decisions.
To avoid this problem, beginning divers should stay within
safe diving depths of 60 feet or less. More advanced divers
should never descend deeper than 130 feet. If you begin to feel
the effects of nitrogen narcosis, simply ascend until the feeling
goes away.
See the chapter
“Adjusting to
the Underwater
World” for further
discussion of
decompression
illness.


22 SCUBA DIVING
Safe Scuba Diving.
Motion Sickness
You need to think about motion sickness (seasickness) before it
happens. If you are prone to motion sickness, avoid it by taking
motion sickness medication (as advised by your physician or
pharmacist) before boarding the boat. Follow all manufacturer’s
instructions for taking any motion sickness medication. Prior to
boarding, avoid greasy foods, which can further irritate an
already weak stomach.
Once on the boat, stay in the fresh air on deck and out
of the boat exhaust. It helps to stay in the center of the boat,
which moves the least, and watch the horizon. Try to stay busy
setting up your equipment so you will be prepared to enter the
water as soon as possible. Reading and intricate tasks tend to
promote motion sickness, so avoid these types of activities.
If you do get sick, go to the leeward side (wind
at your back) of the boat and have someone come
with you. Be careful when you lean over the rail-
ing of the boat. Stay out of the boat’s
restroom (the head) and try to relax.
Fatigue and Overexertion
Scuba diving can be a strenuous activity.
Water’s density makes it harder to move
through than air. Moving slowly and
steadily underwater will help you conserve
energy. Avoid rapid or jerky movements
that waste energy and cause you to use
air faster.
If you try to maintain a high activity
level while diving by, for example, swimming
against a current, swimming long distances, or
carrying excessive weight, you may experience fatigue
or overexertion. The symptoms include tiredness, labored
breathing, a feeling of suffocation, weakness, anxiety, headache,
muscle cramping, or a tendency to panic.
If you experience fatigue or overexertion at the surface,
establish buoyancy (by dropping weights if necessary) and
stop moving. Rest and catch your breath. Signal for help if you
need it. Once you recover, continue at a slower pace. If you
experience fatigue or overexertion underwater, stop all activity,
breathe deeply, and rest. It may help to hold on to an object
for support.
Take your time,
and you will stay
underwater longer
and go farther.


SCUBA DIVING 23
.Safe Scuba Diving
Heat Reactions
Heat exhaustion and heatstroke result when the body
can’t keep itself cool enough. Typical symptoms for heat
exhaustion include dizziness, nausea, muscle cramps, and
a rapid pulse. A person with heat exhaustion should lie down in
a cool, shady place and raise the feet. Loosen or remove your
diving exposure suit and cool off with a damp cloth or fan.
Heatstroke is much more serious than heat exhaustion.
Symptoms include hot, sweaty, red skin, confusion, and disori-
entation. A person suffering from heatstroke must be cooled
immediately. Loosen clothing, fan the person, and apply wet
towels and ice packs. Heat exhaustion and heatstroke are covered
more completely in the Swimming merit badge pamphlet.
Dehydration
When you are scuba diving, it is easy to forget the importance
of staying well-hydrated. You are, after all, surrounded by water,
and you may not feel as though you need to take a drink.
Whether it is hot or cool out, drink plenty of fluids and eat
enough throughout the day to keep your body well-balanced.
Cardiac Emergencies and CPR
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is the important first response in
the event of a cardiac emergency. CPR is used in near-drownings when
a victim’s breathing and heartbeat have stopped. Include individuals
trained in CPR at every diving outing. Complete CPR should
be attempted only by persons trained and qualified under
the supervision of a trained instructor. The Scouts BSA
Handbook for Boys, Scouts BSA Handbook for
Girls, and First Aid merit badge pamphlet fur-
ther explain CPR and when it should be used.
To receive full and proper CPR training,
contact the American Red Cross, the American
Heart Association, or an equivalent agency.
Sunburn is common among those who enjoy the outdoors. Scuba divers
should prevent sunburn by using plenty of sunscreen with a sun protection
factor (SPF) of at least 15. Apply liberally about 30 minutes before sun expo-
sure. Reapply every two hours, especially if you have been in the water. Where
applicable, use reef-safe sunscreen to avoid causing harm to the coral reef.
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R G I R L S
SCOUTS BSAH A N D B O O K F O R B O Y SFIRST AID


24 SCUBA DIVING
Safe Scuba Diving.
Injuries Caused by Aquatic Life
As a diver you will interact with underwater organisms. Nearly
all injuries involving aquatic life or plants and animals that live
in water, result from human carelessness. Most injuries are
minor. It takes only a little bit of understanding and care to
avoid potential problems.
Most injuries result from an encounter with an unaggressive
organism. For example, a diver may suffer a puncture wound
from a sea urchin or a sting from a jellyfish. To avoid these,
watch what you touch while in the water, and wear an exposure
suit as protection from accidental contact. To avoid potential
problems with aquatic life, practice the following precautions.
• Treat all organisms with respect. Never tease or intentionally
disturb them.
• Be cautious in extremely murky water where you may have
trouble seeing where you place your hands.
• Avoid wearing shiny, dangling jewelry that resembles baitfish
or other small prey.
• Wear an exposure suit.
• Maintain buoyancy and stay off the bottom.
• Watch where you are going and where you are placing your
hands and your body.
• Avoid contact with animals.
• Be aware of local advisories, which may issue warnings such
as those about jellyfish along the shoreline.
Sea urchin Jellyfish


SCUBA DIVING 25
.Safe Scuba Diving
Treat venomous wounds such as stings by first focusing on
the victim’s airway, breathing, and circulation (ABCs). Next,
manage bleeding and shock. If possible and safe, remove spines
or stingers with forceps or other tools. Soak the affected area
with hot water for 30 to 90 minutes and keep the area still. After
flushing the wound with running water, dry the area and apply
a triple antibiotic ointment (if the person has no known allergies
or sensitivities to the medication). Cover the wound with a dry,
sterile bandage. For more serious injuries, see a doctor.
Cuts and Scrapes
Simple first-aid care will take care of most minor cuts and
scrapes. As with treating stings and puncture wounds, flush the
area with clean water, apply a triple antibiotic ointment (if the
person has no known allergies or sensitivities to the medication),
and cover with a dry, sterile bandage. See a doctor for more
serious injuries.
If you have cuts or scrapes from contact with corals, be
sure to clean the area carefully or infection may develop. Keep a
close eye on your injuries as they heal, and see a doctor if your
injuries worsen or do not seem to be healing.
Never touch
spines or stingers
from venomous
aquatic animals.


Astronauts and scuba divers use almost the same kind of equipment to be
comfortable in space and underwater. Both have air supply equipment, an
exposure suit for protection, and something to look through—a helmet or mask.


SCUBA DIVING 27
.The Adventure of Scouts BSA Scuba Diving
The Adventure of Scouts
BSA Scuba Diving
Perhaps you have dreamed of being able to fly. When
you watch astronauts work on the International Space
Station during a space walk, you might have thought,
“Wow! I wish I could do that.” The good news is you
don’t have to be an astronaut to experience a similar
weightless feeling. Similar experiences and adventures
are available to you when you learn to dive with
self-contained underwater breathing apparatus—
or scuba—equipment.
Once you venture underwater, your life will be
changed. You will gain new confidence about your
abilities and learn about the underwater world.
Being an astronaut and a scuba diver is not all that different. All U.S.
astronauts train for their space walks in NASA’s gigantic practice
pool called the Neutral Buoyancy Laboratory. Perhaps earning this
merit badge will place you on the path to becoming an astronaut.


28 SCUBA DIVING
.The Adventure of Scouts BSA Scuba Diving.
Whether you dive in freshwater or the ocean, there is always
something new to see, learn, and do underwater.
If you love nature, you will see plenty of it underwater.
No other environment approaches the abundance, diversity,
and excitement to be found while exploring underwater reefs.
On most shallow water reefs, you can easily see hundreds of
different species during a single dive. With time, you will even
discover that underwater areas that seem empty—like a lake or
flooded quarry—are home to unique and interesting life-forms
as well as artifacts and shipwrecks.
If you like making
discoveries, then
welcome to the
Scuba Diving merit
badge. Once you
earn your merit
badge and scuba
certification, you
will be on your
way to exploring
“inner space.”
As a Scouts BSA
scuba diver,
prepare to be
an adventurer.


SCUBA DIVING 29
..The Adventure of Scouts BSA Scuba Diving
Scuba diving allows you to get up
close and personal with those living
things you would normally only
get to see at an aquarium.
Go Diving, and See Critters!
Octopus
Dolphins
Angelfish
Squirrelfish
Grouper
Sea turtle
Sea anemone





SCUBA DIVING 31
.The History of Scuba
The History of Scuba
Humans have been experimenting for centuries with ways to
stay underwater for longer than a single breath. Crude diving
apparatus dates back as far as A.D. 375.
Many of these early efforts and designs failed when tried
underwater, or were never fully developed. By the 1800s,
however, equipment had been developed that allowed divers
to explore the deep using a long hose that connected them to
a surface air supply. These “hard-hat” divers wore very heavy
helmets and lead shoes to walk (not swim) on the bottom.
The hose and heavy equipment greatly limited their ability to
move freely underwater. It was not until the mid-20th century
that the first practical self-contained dive equipment emerged.
Hard-hat diving equipment
This German print from 1511 shows the dream of
walking underwater and recovering lost items on
the seafloor. This is possibly the first printed design
of a diver in equipment. It is doubtful that a diver
could survive this apparatus for much longer than
he or she could hold their breath.


32 SCUBA DIVING
The History of Scuba.
During the 1700s, people experimented with different diving-
apparatus designs. Some designs had partial success, while
many failed when tested underwater or were never built. Most
were initially designed to help salvage wrecked sailing vessels
and their cargo.
In 1860, Benoit Rouquayrol and Auguste Denayrouze
introduced self-contained diving equipment that was
essentially the same as that developed by Jacques-Yves
Cousteau in the mid-20th century.


SCUBA DIVING 33
.The History of Scuba
The First Rebreather Scuba
Englishman Henry Fleuss designed the first
rebreather scuba in 1878. His unit recirculated and
purified oxygen by removing the diver’s exhaled
carbon dioxide. (Carbon dioxide is the waste gas
humans exhale.) Although his system worked, its
use was limited. The biggest obstacle to Fleuss’
unit was that divers cannot use pure oxygen
deeper than about 20 to 30 feet—oxygen becomes
toxic beyond this depth.
In 1943 French ocean explorer Jacques-Yves
Cousteau designed the first practical scuba equipment, known as the
aqualung. Working with an engineer named Emile Gagnan, Cousteau
developed a scuba system that delivers compressed air (not pure oxygen)
to a diver. By automatically adjusting the breathing air pressure and pro-
viding air only when the diver inhaled, this new, self-contained equipment
was easy to operate, reliable, and allowed a diver to remain underwater
for a reasonable amount of time.
Within 20 years of the invention of scuba, the military, underwater
scientists, and recreational divers were using the scuba system. In fact,
the equipment you will be using to obtain your Scuba Diving merit badge
is basically the same design invented by Cousteau and Gagnan.
Modern scuba equipmentOriginal Cousteau aqualung





SCUBA DIVING 35
.Essential Scuba Equipment
Essential Scuba
Equipment
As with any outdoor activity, scuba diving requires that you
understand how to use certain equipment. For many Scouts,
assembling and using the equipment is a big part of the fun.
You will learn a lot about scuba equipment in your course,
but here is a quick overview of the essential pieces of equip-
ment you will need to safely dive as well as explanations of the
purpose of each. Your counselor and local dive center or resort
can show you the different types and models that best suit your
needs and your body.
Masks—A Window to
the Underwater World
If you have ever opened your
eyes underwater, it’s not news to
you that you need a mask to be
able to see clearly while diving.
The reason you need the mask is
that light behaves differently in water
than in air, and your eyes focus
according to how light behaves in air.
That is why water makes everything
blurry. The mask creates an air space
so your eyes can focus.
A mask is designed to be equalized.
When a mask is equalized, the pressure of the water push-
ing on the outside of the mask is the same as the pressure of the
air inside the mask. A scuba mask covers your nose. This allows
you to add air to the space between the glass and your face by
exhaling air through your nose into the space. This process is
called equalization.
NOSE POCKET OR
FINGER POCKET
COMFORTABLE SKIRT
LOW PROFILE
ADJUSTABLE STRAP
Mask features


36 SCUBA DIVING
Essential Scuba Equipment.
Snorkels—Helping You Breathe on the Surface
Since you will scuba dive with an air cylinder on your back, you
may wonder why a snorkel is a standard piece of scuba gear.
You need a snorkel for a few reasons when you scuba dive.
First, it lets you rest or swim with your face in the water
without wasting cylinder air. For example, you might use
your snorkel when you are looking for something
below. Second, when there is a bit of surface chop,
splashing waves can get in your mouth if you do not
have a snorkel. The snorkel is usually high enough
to let you breathe without getting any water. Third,
if you run low on air away from the boat or shore,
a snorkel makes it easier to swim back.
Typical scuba-diving masks Tempered glass, wraparound design
LARGE BORE
SMOOTH BENDS
SELF-DRAINING BARREL
FLEXIBLE TUBE
Scuba divers don’t wear goggles, because goggles cannot be equalized.
Attempting to dive too deep while wearing goggles causes water pressure
to push the goggles uncomfortably against the face. Because goggles do
not cover the nose, a diver cannot make any adjustments to equalize the air
space inside the goggles.
A snorkel is standard equipment for scuba diving.
It is positioned on the mask’s left side.


SCUBA DIVING 37
.Essential Scuba Equipment
Fins—Foot Power Underwater
Fins provide a large surface area so your powerful leg muscles
can move you through the water more effectively than swim-
ming with only your arms. Fins come in two basic styles: the
adjustable-strap design and the full-foot design. Adjustable fins
have open-heel foot pockets and adjustable heel straps. Divers
use this type of fin with wet suit boots that keep the feet warm.
Full-foot fins enclose the heel and fit like rubber slippers. Divers
use this type of fin in warm water.
Divers with
limited leg mobility
sometimes use
special hand fins.
Fins are often made of
both rubber and plastic.
Adjustable fin
Full-foot fin


38 SCUBA DIVING
Essential Scuba Equipment.
Exposure Suits—
Keeping You Warm and Protected
You will use an exposure suit in virtually all diving activities. An
exposure suit has two basic purposes: to reduce heat loss and to
protect you from minor scrapes, stings, and cuts. Wet suits are
by far the most common form of exposure suit. They come in
many styles, patterns, and thicknesses, making them suitable
for insulation in water as cold as 50° F to as warm as 86° F.
Scuba Cylinders—
Your Underwater Air Supply
A scuba cylinder is a cylindrical metal container. It safely stores
the high-pressure air divers use so that they can breathe under-
water. Scuba cylinders come in different sizes. Selecting a scuba
cylinder size mainly depends on a diver’s height and weight.
Exposure suits Scuba cylinders


SCUBA DIVING 39
.Essential Scuba Equipment
Regulators—
Delivering Air When You Need It
A regulator makes it possible for you to use the air in your
cylinder. It reduces the pressure of the air in the scuba cylinder
to match the surrounding water pressure. It delivers air only
when you want it, that is, when you inhale. It controls, or
regulates, the air flow, which is why it is called a regulator.
Regulators have multiple
features and two stages. The first
stage attaches to your scuba cylinder
and the second stage is placed in your
mouth. The pressure gauge (typically
called a submersible pressure gauge,
or SPG) tells you how much air you
have left in your cylinder, while the
alternate air source is used in an
emergency to give to a buddy who
is out of air.
PRESSURE
GAUGE
FIRST
STAGE
SECOND
STAGE
ALTERNATE
AIR SOURCE
PURGE
BUTTON


40 SCUBA DIVING
Essential Scuba Equipment.
Dive Instruments—
Time, Depth, and Direction
Pilots, astronauts, and outdoor enthusiasts use instruments to
guide them during their work and adventures. Scuba divers also
need accurate information to dive safely. These instruments
include a dive timer, compass, depth gauge, and a submersible
pressure gauge (SPG). Often the timer and depth gauge are
combined in one instrument called a dive computer. Some div-
ing instruments are attached to the regulator, while others are
worn on the wrist.
You cannot stay underwater an
unlimited time, even if you have
enough air. Every dive has a
time limit, which changes with
depth, so you need to keep track
of how long you have been
underwater. This is why divers
wear either dive watches or spe-
cial underwater timers that are
pressure-activated stopwatches.
Divers use a depth gauge to
keep track of how far they are
below the surface. Because it is
important not to dive too deep,
using a depth gauge is a crucial
safety measure.
A compass helps divers know
where they are and where they
are going.
DIVE
COMPUTERS


.Essential Scuba Equipment
The photo on the left shows a cluster of
dive instruments attached to a regulator.
These consoles may include a depth gauge,
timer, compass, and air-supply gauge. It is
also possible to wear some dive instruments
on your wrist.
Scuba divers need accurate information to
dive safely. This is especially true of the
air supply, since no one wants to run
out of air underwater. A submersible
pressure gauge like this one shows
how much air is available during a
dive. The red zone indicates that the
air supply is running very low.


42 SCUBA DIVING
Essential Scuba Equipment.
Buoyancy Control Devices—
Helping Control the Ups and Downs
A buoyancy control device, or BCD, is an expandable bladder
that you inflate or deflate to regulate your buoyancy, that is,
your ability to float. You can inflate a BCD by blowing it up as
you would blow up a balloon. Most of the time, however, you
will use an inflator that easily inflates the BCD with air directly
from your cylinder. To decrease buoyancy, you deflate the BCD
through a hose or valve.
In addition to allowing you to control your buoyancy
underwater—letting you remain neutral, sink down,
or float up—the BCD provides positive buoyancy
for resting, swimming, or helping other divers. The
most common style of BCD is worn like a sleeveless
jacket. It holds your cylinder in place as well as
helps provide buoyancy control.
Of the various types of buoyancy control
devices, the jacket-style BCD is by far the
most common. Pictured here is a Scout
connecting his jacket-style BCD to his
scuba cylinder.
LARGE-DIAMETER
INFLATION/
DEFLATION HOSE
LOW-PRESSURE
INFLATION
MECHANISM
COMFORTABLE
HARNESS
AND BACKPACK
PROPER SIZE FOR
AMPLE BUOYANCY
OVERPRESSURE
RELIEF VALVE


SCUBA DIVING 43
.Essential Scuba Equipment
Weight Systems—A Sinking Feeling
Scuba divers often wear a weight system to help them sink
and easily get underwater. All weight systems use lead.
You may find that you can sink underwater without lead
weight, but if you are wearing a wet suit you probably
will need some additional weight to get down.
Scuba divers use two basic weight-system types:
(1) a weight belt worn around the waist or (2) an
integrated weight system. Integrated weight
systems carry lead weight in special quick-release
pockets designed into a BCD. The blue pouch in
the photo below contains small lead shot for
weight. Divers call these “soft” weights.
Weight belt Integrated weight system
1 2
Complete
scuba system





SCUBA DIVING 45
.Adjusting to the Underwater World
Adjusting to the
Underwater World
When scuba diving you will experience some new and different
sensations related to being underwater. Differences include
buoyancy, pressure and temperature differences, and changes in
the way you see and hear. Becoming a diver depends on under-
standing how these differences affect you.
Buoyancy—Up, Down, or Level
Have you ever wondered why a large steel
ship floats, but a small steel nail sinks? The
answer is surprisingly simple. The ship’s steel
hull forms a shape that displaces—pushes
aside—a great deal of water. The same
amount of steel reshaped into a giant nail
would sink, like the small steel nail. This
demonstrates that whether an object floats
depends on both its weight and how much
water it displaces.
While scuba diving you will either want to comfortably
stay on the surface with your equipment on, descend or ascend
underwater, or remain neutral. All these situations require you
to either have positive, negative, or neutral buoyancy. If you are
resting comfortably on the surface without moving your arms
and legs, you have positive buoyancy. If at depth you are safely
touching the bottom, then you have negative buoyancy. When
you remain neutral underwater you are effectively “flying”
above the bottom.
While scuba diving, you will control your buoyancy with
your lungs and breath control. For example, if you exhale you
will descend, and if you inhale you will ascend. Your buoyancy
control device and the amount of lead weight you place in your
weight system also will help you adjust buoyancy underwater.


46 SCUBA DIVING
Adjusting to the Underwater World.
Pressure—The Force of Water
As a scuba diver, you will descend and ascend regularly
underwater. During this activity your body will need to adjust
to either increasing pressure as you go down or decreasing
pressure as you go up. You will feel pressure on your
body’s small air spaces (sinuses, ears), which hold
compressible air. If you don’t equalize the pressure
in these air spaces with the surrounding pressure,
you will feel pain in these air spaces.
When you exhale you release air from your lungs, which makes
you less buoyant and helps you descend at the beginning of a
dive. Underwater you can use lung volume and breath control to
fine-tune your neutral buoyancy.
The pressure-
change sensation
you feel while
diving is similar to
what you may feel
in your ears when
you fly in a plane
or drive up into
the mountains.
As you dive deeper, the pressure on your body
increases. This pressure pushes in on your body’s air
spaces. The two major air spaces in your body most
noticeably affected by increasing pressure are your ears
and sinuses. The major artificial air space most affected
by increasing pressure is the one created by your mask.
At any given time while scuba diving underwater,
you will either have positive, neutral, or negative
buoyancy. This Scout is hovering above the bottom
demonstrating neutral buoyancy.


SCUBA DIVING 47
.Adjusting to the Underwater World
Solving the Pressure Problem When Going Down
You can easily equalize the pressure within the air spaces
created by your ears and sinuses. To do this, pinch your
nose shut and gently blow against it with your mouth closed;
this directs air from your throat into your ears and sinus
air spaces. Another technique is swallowing and wiggling the
jaw from side to side. A third technique combines these—
swallow and wiggle your jaw while blowing gently against
your pinched nose. To equalize the pressure in your mask
so that it does not press too hard against your face, simply
exhale through your nose.
Going Up—Getting Rid of Excess Air
Scuba equipment allows you to breathe underwater by deliver-
ing air at a pressure equal to the surrounding water pressure.
This means your lungs will be at their normal volume while at
depth. However, when you head up toward the surface, the air
in your lungs will expand, that is, the air will take up more
space in your lungs. To release the excess air, you must either
breathe normally while ascending or exhale. Never hold your
breath when diving.
Equalizing pressure when descending (left) and releasing excess
air when ascending (right)
Never hold your
breath when
scuba diving.


48 SCUBA DIVING
Adjusting to the Underwater World.
If you were to hold your breath while going up, your lungs
would overexpand, much like the sealed bag in the illustration.
With an open container such as the upside-down glass in the
illustration the excess expanding air simply bubbles out into the
surrounding water. Why is this expansion of air a problem
for divers? If you don’t exhale this expanding air when
you are going up, it can cause lung overexpansion,
or a lung rupture in which the lung tissue tears.
This is the most serious injury that can occur to
a diver. For this reason, the most important rule
in scuba diving is to breathe continuously and
never, never hold your breath.
Pressure and Air Supply
Your Scouting friends who don’t dive may
ask you, “Hey, how long does your air last
underwater?” This is a good question. The
correct answer is that it depends on how
deep a diver dives and the size of the scuba
cylinder. The deeper a diver dives the more
air will be used because of increasing pressure.
At shallow depths with a standard size cylinder you
would typically expect to be able to dive for about one
hour. But the deeper you go and the more energy you
expend, the more air you will use.


.Adjusting to the Underwater World
Decompression—
The Importance of Going Up Slow
As you dive, your time underwater has limits. These limits
are affected by depth, your air supply, the cold, and fatigue.
Depth-Related Limitations
The pressure on a diver’s body increases with depth. This increase
in pressure causes nitrogen (the gas that makes up 79 percent of
the air we breathe) to be absorbed into the body’s tissues. The
deeper a diver dives and the longer the diver stays underwater,
the more nitrogen the body absorbs.
The nitrogen that dissolves into a diver’s tissues must leave
the body as the diver exhales while ascending to the surface,
or the diver could experience serious problems. To make sure
that the excess nitrogen is properly and slowly released, divers
should always do the following.
1. Ascend very slowly—no faster than 60 feet per minute
(a dive computer may require an even slower ascent).
2. Make a safety stop at a depth of 15 feet for three minutes
while ascending to the surface at the end of every dive.
3. Follow special tables or a dive computer to limit depth
and time underwater.
4. Follow special procedures when flying after making
scuba dives. (Many divers travel on airplanes to get to diving
destinations. When they return home on the plane, they must
end their diving activities up to 18 hours prior to flying.)
This set of procedures is called decompression, which means
“releasing pressure.” If you do not make a safety stop at the end
of each dive or if you ignore the special tables or dive computer
by staying longer than a prescribed time at a particular depth,
you may get decompression sickness. Decompression sickness
occurs when tiny bubbles of nitrogen gas form in the
tissues of the body.
Because nitrogen bubbles can form in different
places in the body, decompression sickness
symptoms can vary. As discussed in the
chapter “Safe Scuba Diving,” symptoms
and signs include paralysis, shock,
weakness, dizziness, numbness, tingling,
difficulty breathing, and joint pain.
Decompression
sickness is usually
very easily
avoided by
following proper
diving techniques.


50 SCUBA DIVING
Adjusting to the Underwater World.
Staying Warm
It is easy to stay relatively warm underwater with the right expo-
sure suit. Since water cools you much faster than air, you will
almost always need to wear some type of exposure suit when
diving. Divers often wear wet suits to slow their heat loss.
In all but very warm pools and
tropical water, you will need
to wear an exposure suit to
slow down your heat loss
underwater. For extra warmth
and protection, divers wear
thick wet suits, a hood for the
head, and boots for the feet.
The most important
point to remember
about body
temperature and
diving is that if
you begin to shiver
continuously
underwater, get
out, immediately
dry off, and
seek warmth.


SCUBA DIVING 51
.Adjusting to the Underwater World
Underwater Vision—
Bigger and Closer but Less Colorful
Water changes how light behaves. First, the optical
effect of light traveling through water and air
magnifies objects underwater. This makes
things look closer and larger than they really
are. Also, water absorbs the colors in sun-
light the deeper you go. If you dive deep
enough, all you will see is dark blue. Reds
disappear in shallow water, followed by
shades of orange, yellow, and then green.
When you are underwater, fish and other objects will look
closer and larger than they really are.
If you want to see the underwater
world in full color, stick to fairly
shallow water. As you dive deeper,
shades of red begin to disappear
followed by orange, yellow, and
then green.
MAGNIFIED SIZE
AND IMAGINED
LOCATION OF FISH
ACTUAL SIZE AND
LOCATION OF FISH


52 SCUBA DIVING
Adjusting to the Underwater World.
COME HERE
LEVEL OFF, THIS
DEPTH
EARS NOT CLEARING
HOLD HANDS
ME, OR WATCH ME
GO THAT WAY
I AM COLD
GET WITH YOUR BUDDY
UNDER, OVER, OR
AROUND
WHICH DIRECTION?
TAKE IT EASY,
SLOW DOWN
YOU LEAD, I’LL FOLLOW
Hearing Underwater—
You Can Listen But You Can’t Talk
Sound travels well through water, so you will be able to hear underwater.
However, sound travels about four times faster in water than in air. This
makes it difficult to tell where a sound is coming from.
You will not be doing much talking underwater. You can attract atten-
tion vocally by yelling into a regulator, but you cannot speak clearly, so
you will need to use other methods of communication. For example, you
can rap your knife on your tank to get your buddy’s attention, write on a
slate, and use hand signals. Many scuba divers “talk” with their hands
through standardized hand signals that most divers recognize.


SCUBA DIVING 53
.Adjusting to the Underwater World
Hand signals may vary somewhat, so be sure to review the signals
you will be using when planning a dive with a new buddy.
STOP, HOLD IT,
STAY THERE
DISTRESS, HELP
DANGER
LOW ON AIR
SOMETHING IS
WRONG
OK? OK. (ON SURFACE
AT DISTANCE)
GO UP, GOING UP
OUT OF AIR
OK? OK. OK? OK.
(GLOVE ON)
OK? OK. (ONE HAND
OCCUPIED)
GO DOWN,
GOING DOWN
BUDDY BREATHE
OR SHARE AIR





SCUBA DIVING 55
.Essential Diving Skills
Essential Diving Skills
You will be able to perform the essential diving skills discussed
in this chapter after you have successfully completed your skills
development sessions in a pool or confined water. Confined
water refers to a body of water much like a pool, with similar
pool-like conditions, such as a clear and shallow pond, a lake,
or an ocean lagoon or bay.
After you practice these skills in confined water, you will
apply them during open water dives under the supervision of
your scuba instructor in order to achieve your dive
certification and earn this merit badge. Open
water refers to a natural, nonpool-like aquatic
area such as a lake, quarry, or an ocean
environment. Open water environments
are deeper than confined water areas with
natural contours and features.
Assembling, Inspecting,
and Testing Equipment
Before you can use scuba equip-
ment, you have to be able to put
together your cylinder, regulator,
and buoyancy control device,
or BCD. Putting your equipment
together carefully allows it to
function correctly underwater.
In addition, you will learn how to
inspect and test your equipment
before using it. Inspection and
testing help make sure all the pieces
of equipment function properly before
you venture underwater.


56 SCUBA DIVING
Essential Diving Skills.
Proper Weighting
Before putting your equipment
on, you will learn how to add
or subtract weights from
your weight belt or weight pockets in your
BCD (collectively, these two places where you can
place lead weight are called a weight system). This
allows you to adjust your buoyancy so you can
descend underwater but not be too heavy on the
dive bottom. On the bottom, you may practice
achieving neutral buoyancy by doing a fin pivot.
A fin pivot is a training skill to help you
practice attaining neutral buoyancy. If you
are properly weighted on the bottom, you will
pivot up on your fins when you inhale and pivot
down when you exhale. More often than not, you
will want to dive with neutral buoyancy, neither
descending nor ascending. Neutral buoyancy keeps
you under control and off the bottom so you don’t stir
up debris or harm aquatic life on the bottom. Do not add
too much weight; overweighting is dangerous.
Entries and Exits
Depending on the dive site where you learn your essential div-
ing skills, you will practice a variety of water entries and exits.
Different types of dive sites require different types of entries and
exits. In general, the best entry and exit is usually the easiest. If
you can wade or lower yourself into the water, that is usually
better than a long drop. If you can use a ladder or simply walk
out of the water, that is usually best. Always leave the mask on
and either a snorkel or regulator in your mouth until you are
completely out of the water.
Entry Exit
Weight belt
Fin pivot


SCUBA DIVING 57
.Essential Diving Skills
Emergency Function of the Weight System
In an emergency at the surface, your first reaction should be to
inflate your BCD. However, if your BCD does not support you,
your next option would be to drop your weights.
Snorkel/Regulator Exchanges at the Surface
Quite often you will snorkel on the surface directly over the
place where you want to dive so that you do not waste cylinder
air on the way. When you get there, you will exchange your
snorkel for your regulator and then descend. Since there may
be waves or chop in the ocean or lake, you might have to do
this with your face in the water.


58 SCUBA DIVING
Essential Diving Skills.
Mouthpiece Clearing—Snorkel and Regulator
Both snorkels and regulators can get water in them. To clear
water from your snorkel or regulator, simply exhale
forcefully and sharply into the mouthpiece. This
“blasts” the water out of the equipment. Typically,
you will need to do this when you surface and
switch from your regulator to your snorkel.
Regulator Recovery
and Retrieval
If your regulator should accidentally drop
from your mouth, you can recover it by
sweeping your arm forward and placing it
back into your mouth.
Controlled Descents and Ascents
Every diver needs to descend (go down) at the beginning of a
dive and then ascend (go up) at the end. In your certification
course, you will learn the specific steps for appropriate descents
and ascents.
You will want to practice your regulator recovery and
retrieval skills.


SCUBA DIVING 59
.Essential Diving Skills
Descents
The descent has five steps that you will practice in
your open water diver course.
1. Signal that you and your buddy are both ready
to descend.
2. Orient yourself to something at the surface that
will help you find out where you are when
you resurface.
3. Switch from your snorkel to your regulator.
Do this with your face in the water.
4. Check the time, set your watch bezel (the movable
timer dial on the outer area of some traditional
dive watches), or start your underwater timer.
If you don’t have an underwater watch or timer,
for practice look at your wrist where you would
wear your watch to simulate noting the time.
5. Slowly deflate your BCD and exhale to initiate a head-up
descent. Equalize your ears immediately upon submerging
and do so frequently during descent. You do not need to be
straight up and down, but staying in a generally head-up
position helps you stay oriented and makes it easier to equalize.
Ascents
A proper ascent has five steps that you will learn and
practice in your open water diver course.
1. You and your buddy signal each other and agree
to ascend.
2. Note the time of your ascent. Again, if you do not
have a watch for this dive, simulate checking the
time by looking at your wrist.
3. Hold your right hand over your head (so you do
not run into anything) and hold up the buoyancy
control device hose with exhaust control using
your left hand. Air expanding in your BCD during
ascent will increase your buoyancy. You need
to release air as you rise to keep your ascent
under control.
4. Look up and around, slowly rotating to make sure
the area above you is clear.
5. Swim up slowly, at a rate no faster than 60 feet (18 meters)
per minute (slower is fine), while breathing normally.


60 SCUBA DIVING
Essential Diving Skills.
Surface Snorkel Swimming With a
Full Scuba System
Quite often you will snorkel on the surface to the place where
you want to dive, which means that you won’t waste cylinder
air on the way. During confined water development, you will
practice snorkel swimming on the surface with scuba equipment.
Underwater Swimming
After you have practiced a few skills, you will be ready to swim
around a bit. The standard kick for diving is the flutter kick.
If you use the flutter kick appropriately you will save energy,
because the flutter kick is quite efficient.
Flutter kick


SCUBA DIVING 61
.Essential Diving Skills
Mask Removal, Replacement, and Clearing
Water sometimes leaks into your mask while diving—especially
if you smile or laugh. In addition, you may need to take your
mask off underwater to adjust it, so it is essential to become
comfortable with taking it off and then putting it back on. Once
your mask is back on, you will clear the water from it by exhal-
ing through your nose. This pushes the water out of the mask,
allowing you to see again.
Buddy-System Techniques
During your confined water skills development,
you will practice the buddy system—always
diving with a buddy who stays nearby at all
times. Dive buddies help each other with
things such as putting on and checking
each other’s equipment before the dive;
reminding each other to check depth,
time, and air-supply limits; and providing
emergency assistance in the unlikely
event it is necessary. Remember, the
buddy system is part of Safe Swim
Defense training.


62 SCUBA DIVING
Essential Diving Skills.
Underwater and Surface Buoyancy Control
Achieving neutral buoyancy underwater is a skill you will use
often while diving. During confined water skill development,
you will practice hovering above the bottom, demonstrating
your ability to maintain neutral buoyancy. You need to maintain
neutral buoyancy while diving for the following reasons.
• To avoid inappropriate contact with the bottom that could
possibly harm bottom-dwelling animals
• To be able to relax and maneuver easily
• To prevent rapid, uncontrolled ascents and descents
Underwater Removal and Replacement
of Scuba System
There may be times when you need to remove and replace your
scuba unit. Underwater, your scuba unit may need adjustment or
may be slightly entangled and need to be freed. On the surface,
you may put your scuba unit on after entering the water and
remove it before exiting.


SCUBA DIVING 63
.Essential Diving Skills
Out-of-Air Emergency Alternatives
If you pay attention to your air-supply gauge and plan your dive
conservatively, it is unlikely that you will ever run out of air
underwater. Even so, you need to be able to handle such an
emergency, and you will practice a few responses during your
confined water dives.
Equipment Care and Maintenance
Like all outdoor equipment, diving equipment needs to be
cleaned, maintained, and stored after each use. Rinse all
equipment with freshwater and allow it to dry in a place
that is out of the sun.
Be sure to follow
the manufacturer’s
directions for the
proper cleaning,
care, and storage
of all your
scuba equipment.





SCUBA DIVING 65
.Dive Equipment for Adventurers
Dive Equipment for
Adventurers
Divers love working with their equipment and trying new
devices. Some divers use specialty equipment to get more out of
their underwater adventures. This chapter outlines what is pos-
sible as you increase your diving experience and skills.
Diver Propulsion Vehicles
If you want to travel farther, save time, and save air on a dive,
diver propulsion vehicles (DPVs, or “scooters”) are one answer.
DPVs tow (or push in some cases) you through the water,
making them excellent tools for a variety of diving situations.
It is also thrilling to zoom over a reef or through a kelp forest
like you are flying a jet or racing a motorcycle. You might find
you love DPVs simply because they are so much fun.
DPVs, or “scooters,” can be a valuable tool for explorers who want
to cover a lot of territory underwater in a short period of time.


Dive Equipment for Adventurers.
Boats and Kayaks
Many divers also are boat owners. Boats allow divers to reach
underwater destinations beyond a beach or shoreline. How
much a boat can extend your dive-location opportunities
depends on the size of the boat and how well it is equipped.
Boats allow
divers to reach
dive destinations
beyond a shoreline.
Dive kayaking has
become a popular,
yet inexpensive
way to dive offshore.


SCUBA DIVING 67
.Dive Equipment for Adventurers
Digital Underwater Cameras
Digital photography has revolutionized taking pictures
underwater just as much as it has on dry land.
Compact, easy-to-use underwater camera sys-
tems have become so simple that some people
begin taking underwater photos on their
very first dive. Professional underwater
photographers use expensive cameras in
watertight housings to take their photos.
As a result, digital underwater photog-
raphy suits itself to practically all levels
of interest, whether you simply want
fun snapshots or whether you plan to
pursue it as a dedicated artist.
Nitrox
Nitrox, or oxygen-enriched air, has been
in use for many years. It started with sci-
entific divers, then technical divers, and is
now common with recreational divers. A
slightly higher percentage of oxygen in the air
enables divers to increase no-stop limits to enjoy
longer dives or increase safety margins. To use
nitrox, a diver must be certified in its use and safety.
Special equipment a recreational diver will use to dive with
nitrox include a gas analyzer and special nitrox-marked tanks.
Only a professional scuba center should fill nitrox tanks.
One
activity you
might want
to try once
you become
a certified
diver is
underwater
photography.
You can even
take under-
water photos
of your
Scouting
companions.


68 SCUBA DIVING
Dive Equipment for Adventurers.
Technical Diving Equipment
Technical diving—“tec diving” for short—is a relative newcomer
to the world of underwater exploration. Tec diving is a very
specialized form of diving that uses extensive equipment and
procedures to dive beyond the limits of recreational diving.
Tec diving requires more elaborate and intense training, plus
ample experience and the willingness to accept the risks. As a
Scout, you will have to wait until you are at least 18 to enroll
in a technical diving course.
WING-TYPE BCD
(BUOYANCY
CONTROL DEVICE)
DRY SUIT
SHEARS
Z-KNIFE
MULTIGAS DIVE
COMPUTERS
IN-THIGH POCKET
Compass
Underwater slate
Surface signaling devices
Backup dive tables
FINS
DECOMPRESSION
CYLINDER/STAGE
BOTTLE
TWIN CYLINDERS
MASK
HARNESS
SECONDARY
REGULATOR
SPG (SUBMERSIBLE
PRESSURE GAUGE)
PRIMARY REGULATOR
SAFETY REEL
AND LIFT BAG
Technical divers explore the ocean to deeper depths and for longer
periods than recreational divers, so they need specialized training
and equipment. Extra scuba cylinders, special breathing gases,
multiple regulators, dive computers, and extremely warm expo-
sure suits are just some of the special equipment tec divers use.


SCUBA DIVING 69
.Dive Equipment for Adventurers
Closed Circuit Rebreathers (CCRs)
Divers who use conventional scuba equipment breathe in
air from a cylinder using a regulator. When a diver exhales
using this equipment, bubbles exit the regulator and rise to
the surface. The exhaled air contains a higher percentage of
carbon dioxide than the air inhaled. However, the exhaled
air also contains quite a bit of usable oxygen, but it is not
used again with this type of scuba equipment.
Rebreathers are scuba devices that allow divers to breathe
their own air over and over again so exhaled oxygen is not
wasted. Rebreathers have several advantages over conventional
scuba equipment.
• Rebreathers are silent. They produce few or no bubbles and
do not disturb marine life or reveal the diver’s presence.
Many underwater photographers use rebreathers to get close
to marine animals.
• Rebreathers allow divers to spend a longer time underwater
than do conventional cylinders.
• Rebreathers are often lighter in weight.
• Rebreathers allow for less decompression time than when
diving using a conventional cylinder.
Rebreathers are considered to be advanced scuba equipment
and require extra, specialized training. Even so, more and more
recreational divers are beginning to use rebreathers.
Military divers,
such as the
U.S. Navy SEALs,
use rebreathers
to keep from
being detected
underwater.
Look, No Bubbles!
Rebreathers allow divers
to stay underwater longer.
In addition, they give off few
or no bubbles, so divers are
much less noticeable. Aquatic
animals cannot detect rebreather
divers as easily as divers using
conventional scuba equipment
that release noisy bubbles.


Of all the planets in our solar system, scientists
believe only Earth has abundant water and supports life.


SCUBA DIVING 71
.Exploring the Ocean Planet
Exploring the
Ocean Planet
Imagine a planet where approximately
70 percent of its living space is water
and more than half of this area mea-
sures deeper than 9,800 feet deep.
This is planet Earth—and is the reason
why it is sometimes called the “ocean
planet.” Of all the planets in our solar
system, Earth is unique. It is the only
planet known to have liquid water. Life as
we know it depends on water. Without water,
life simply cannot exist.
This NASA photograph shows that we truly live on an “ocean
planet.” Water covers more than 70 percent of Earth’s surface.
About 97 percent of the water on Earth is saltwater contained
in the oceans. When you focus
on our water
planet, think
exploration.
Very little of the
underwater world
has been explored.
In fact, less than
5 percent of
the ocean has
been explored.
Marine scientists use scuba
and small deep-diving sub-
marines called submersibles
to explore the ocean. With
this technology they can see
firsthand what’s beneath the
waves and collect specimens
for research. Even with this
technology, they’ve been able
to explore less than 5 percent
of the ocean.


72 SCUBA DIVING
Exploring the Ocean Planet.
Underwater Ecosystems to Explore
The ocean is vast. Throughout the world’s oceans, there are many
different environments, or ecosystems. An aquatic ecosystem is a
specific underwater environment with a clearly defined physical
boundary, distinct physical conditions (temperature of the water,
depth, etc.), at least one energy source (such as sunlight), and a
community of plants, animals, and other organisms that interact
with one another and through which energy is transferred.
Organic/Inorganic
Decomposed Debris
PRIMARY
PRODUCERS
PRIMARY
CARNIVORES
SECOND-LEVEL
CARNIVORES
FOURTH-LEVEL
CARNIVORES
THIRD-LEVEL
CARNIVORES
HERBIVORES
Seal
Killer whale
Birds
Penguin
Benthic
fishesAnchovy
Squid
Sperm
whaleBull
shark
Tube
anemone
Baleen
whale
Copepods Krill
Protozoans Clam
BacteriaPhytoplankton
Great
white shark
Food Web
Food Pyramid
Food webs and food pyramids illustrate the flow of energy. For example,
algae use energy from sunlight to carry out photosynthesis—a process
that converts carbon dioxide into food compounds. The algae are then
eaten by other organisms. Nutrients from the algae provide energy to
these organisms that in turn are eaten by other organisms. In this way,
the sun’s energy is passed from organism to organism in the ecosystem.
HETEROTROPHS
AUTOTROPHS
TROPHIC
LEVEL


SCUBA DIVING 73
.Exploring the Ocean Planet
Freshwater Ecosystems
Inland, away from the ocean, divers may explore freshwater eco-
systems, both natural and human-made bodies of water. These
include reservoirs, mountain lakes, flooded rock quarries,
springs, caves, and rivers. Visibility can range from a couple of
feet to clearer than the clearest ocean water. Such dive places
are often very popular.
Although freshwater ecosystems account for only a tiny
portion of Earth’s aquatic environment, they are vitally important
to life on Earth. These ecosystems also can be very diverse, that
is, they support a large number of different types of animals and
plants. For example, the Amazon River is believed to contain
almost as many fish species as found in all the world’s coral reefs.
Some inland bodies of water, such as the Great Lakes,
are actually freshwater seas that have had the same roles in
culture and shipping commerce as large seas. These lakes offer
good opportunities for shipwreck diving. Wrecks are often far
better preserved in these bodies of water than are wrecks in
saltwater. This is because rust forms more slowly in freshwater
than in saltwater. In addition, freshwater supports fewer organ-
isms that contribute to the deterioration of the wreck. This is
particularly true of wooden-hulled craft, which deteriorate and
collapse in only a couple of decades in tropical seas but that
can last well over a century in the cold depths of a lake.
Rivers have their own personalities. In many rivers, divers
will enter upstream, drift with the current, and exit downstream.
Other rivers flow slowly enough that divers can dive them as they
would dive a lake, without being overly concerned about currents.
You could scuba
dive in a different
place, every
week for an entire
lifetime and there
would still be new
wonders to see.


74 SCUBA DIVING
Exploring the Ocean Planet.
Marine Ecosystems
Marine ecosystems are saltwater ecosystems.
CORAL REEFS
Of all Earth’s ecosystems, few compare to the coral reef. A coral
reef consists of the hard outer skeletons of tiny animals called
corals. Most scientists believe that coral reefs are the most
diverse ecosystems in the ocean. The Central-South Pacific area
between Asia and Australia has the world’s highest diversity of
marine species. In this area, more than 2,000 species of fish are
known, with new species discovered every year.
Coral reefs exist in many parts of the world, including
coastal areas near southeastern Asia, southeastern Africa, north-
eastern Australia, eastern Brazil, and near Florida and Hawaii.
These are all tropical or subtropical areas. The tropics lie within
a narrow band of water and land on each side of the equator.
They include all the land and water situated between the Tropic
of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn.
Coral reef ecosystems are fragile. Scientists, divers, and
others familiar with coral are concerned about the health of these
ecosystems. The conditions corals require for life are narrow and
specific. Corals need a lot of light and clear water that is free of
sand and debris that could clog, smother, and kill the corals.
The Central–South Pacific area between Asia and Australia has
the world’s highest marine species diversity.
The entire tropical
zone receives the
sun’s rays more
directly than areas
in higher latitudes,
so the average
annual tempera-
ture of the tropics
is higher. Seasonal
temperatures vary
less than in other
places on Earth.


SCUBA DIVING 75
.Exploring the Ocean Planet
A healthy coral ecosystem requires water that is relatively
free of nutrients. This may seem odd. However, coral ecosystems
efficiently pass on and preserve organic material. The lack of
nutrients in the water actually protects the corals from organisms
that need more nutrients (such as species of algae) and that would
otherwise compete with the corals for food and other resources.
Soft corals form colonies but don’t
secrete a hard, rock-like exoskeleton.
When you scuba
dive around corals,
never touch them
with your fingers,
body, or fin tips.
Most corals
break off easily.
Carefully control
your buoyancy
with your buoyancy
control device
(BCD) to remain
neutral and off
the bottom.One of the first things you will notice about tropical coral reef
ecosystems is that they are colorful. Many reef creatures are
quite delicate as well.
Hard corals look like colorful rock. In reality, they are a
colony of fragile, tiny animals. Each secretes a rock-like
substance (calcium carbonate) that makes up its hard
exoskeleton—an outer skeleton that supports and
protects each animal’s body. These exoskeletons are
what form the structure of a coral reef.


76 SCUBA DIVING
Exploring the Ocean Planet.
TEMPERATE KELP FORESTS
Temperate marine ecosystems—cooler, but still mild, environ-
ments—are wonderful places to dive, but they do require
that you wear a warm exposure suit to stay comfortable.
The west coast of the United States and areas along
the northeastern coast of North America can be
considered temperate.
Of these temperate areas, the kelp forest eco-
system is one of the more unique. Giant kelps,
a type of algae, can grow up to 12 inches a day
and reach a total length of 80 feet, as long as
they are in clear water with ample sunlight and
nutrients. Kelp forests provide a safe living envi-
ronment for a substantial number of temperate
fish and reef-dwelling creatures.
POLAR ECOSYSTEMS
Because of their nutrient-rich water, the oceans at both the
North Pole and the South Pole are home to some of the largest
organisms on the planet. Every species of great whale—including
humpback and gray whales and many other marine mammals—
feed in the polar regions, mainly during the warm, long days of
summer. These are the only seas rich enough in nutrients to
support large populations of these hungry giants.
While coral reefs are characterized by having lots of different
species with relatively small populations, the polar seas are the
opposite. They have a low number of types of animals, but large
populations. For these reasons, a growing number of divers are
visiting polar ecosystems for adventure, thrills, and the chance
to see very clear water and large animals.
Kelp is important
because it is
the foundation
for many
temperate coastal
ecosystems, much
as coral is the
foundation for
many tropical
marine ecosystems.
Kelp forests are fascinating ecosystems for divers
to explore. The fastest-growing algae is giant kelp.
Forests of this algae provide a lush environment for
many underwater creatures.
Ice diving requires special
training from experienced
instructors. Divers certified
as ice divers have the
opportunity to dive
year-round in clear
water and to see unique
cold-water creatures.


SCUBA DIVING 77
.Exploring the Ocean Planet
Being a Good Steward of Our Ocean Planet
No matter where you live, you are connected to the ocean. It
supplies you with oxygen and freshwater. Most of the oxygen in
the atmosphere originally came from the activities of photosyn-
thesizing organisms in the ocean. Much of Earth’s freshwater is
water that evaporates from the ocean and then condenses and
falls as rain.
The ocean also moderates Earth’s climate, influences our
weather, and affects our health. We get food, medicine, minerals,
and energy resources from the ocean. In addition, the ocean
serves as a global highway for ships and navies.
Helping to Protect the Ocean
Because you depend on the ocean, you need to become a good
steward of this largely unexplored portion of our planet. Even
if you live miles from the ocean, you can participate in its pro-
tection. Here are some general principles to help you become
a good steward of any environment.
• Take responsibility for your actions in all things. It sounds
simple, but being accountable to yourself will help you do
what is necessary to become a good steward of the oceans.
The ocean may
someday provide
you with a career.
See the chapter
“Diving-Related
Career
Opportunities”
for a discussion of
diving professions.
Cave Diving
Highly trained cave divers explore
underground aquatic ecosystems. In the
Mexican Yucatan (south of the city of
Cancun), exploratory cave divers have
mapped submerged caves with more
than 461 miles of passages. The longest
single passage has been mapped to
74 miles. More than 20 years since the
first serious cave exploration began in
the Yucatan, divers are still discovering
new caves and unexplored passages.
Specialized cave-diving training is always required before entering
underwater caverns (the lighted entrance area of a cave) and actual cave
passages. Nevertheless, those well-trained divers who have completed
cave-diving courses find the adventure an incredible experience.
Cave diver exploring Mexico’s
Yucatan Peninsula


Exploring the Ocean Planet.
• Stop to consider the consequences of your actions.
Ask, “If I choose to do this, what will be the result?”
Remember the Outdoor Code: “As an American, I will do my
best to be clean in my outdoor manners, be careful with fire,
be considerate in the outdoors, and be conservation-minded.”
• Lead by example. If you become a good steward of the
ocean, it will inspire your family and friends to act similarly.
• Remember that one person can make a difference.
Small accomplishments add up faster than you might think.
Here are some ideas of what you can do to protect the
ocean, regardless of where you live.
• Learn. The more you know about the ocean, the better
caretaker you will be.
• Be a voice for the ocean. Share with your fellow Scouts,
parents, other family members, and neighbors what you
have learned about protecting our ocean.
• Become a scuba diver. Scuba diving allows you to visit and
experience the ocean firsthand. Your experiences will provide
you with the motivation to protect our ocean. When you
do scuba dive, dive responsibly. Keep off the bottom, avoid
touching a reef or marine life, and never take souvenirs.


SCUBA DIVING 79
.Exploring the Ocean Planet
• Practice the appropriate principles of Leave No Trace
while you dive. In particular, practice the following: (1) Plan
ahead and prepare. Watch for hazards and follow all the rules
of the park, outdoor facility, marine park, or boat. (2) Leave
what you find. (3) Respect wildlife. (4) Be considerate of
other visitors. Remember that other divers or visitors may
be nearby. (5) Dispose of waste properly. Stash your trash.
Do not throw trash into the ocean.
• Choose your home detergents and cleaning
products carefully. The household chemicals you
use may end up in our waterways and be carried to
the oceans, so be sure to use naturally derived and
biodegradable detergents and cleaning products.
• Eat only sustainable seafood. Certain types of seafood
sold in markets are endangered and overfished. Being
careful about which kinds of seafood you eat is important,
both at home and in restaurants. Some species to avoid eat-
ing include Chilean sea bass, Atlantic cod, Atlantic flounder,
grouper, halibut, rockfish, snapper, imported swordfish, blue-
fin tuna, shark, turtle, Caribbean spiny lobster, and conch.
• Fish responsibly. If you enjoy recreational fishing, obey
regulations and consider catch-and-release style fishing.
• Be “water-wise” at home. Have your parents install
a water-saving toilet or add a water saver bag or brick
to your toilet. Take shorter showers and add water-
saving or low-flow showerheads and faucets in your
home. Run your dishwasher and washing machine
only with a full load. Using less freshwater at home
means that less polluted runoff makes its ways into
streams and rivers that ultimately flow into the ocean.
• Avoid using harmful pesticides and weed killers
around your home. Some yard chemicals can be harmful
to ocean inhabitants. Rain can wash the chemicals off your
yard, into rivers, and ultimately into the ocean.
• Refuse to buy ornaments made from dead marine life.
Coral jewelry and home decorations made from dead marine
life cannot compare to their living beauty in the ocean.
• Refuse to buy wild marine life for home aquariums. If you
keep a saltwater tank, buy only marine life that have been
certified as being sustainably caught or reared in captivity.





SCUBA DIVING 81
.Gaining Diving Experience
Gaining Diving Experience
Once you earn your Scuba Diving merit badge and become a certi-
fied diver, go diving with your fellow Scouts. Dive often and build
your experience. Dive different locations and explore new areas.
There is no need to limit yourself just to swimming around under-
water and sightseeing—although that can be a lot of fun. Try new
challenges such as underwater digital photography or exploring
wrecks. Recognize that scuba diving is more than just a recre-
ational activity, it is a door through which you reach hundreds
of underwater pursuits and maybe even a lifelong career.
Scouts BSA Continuing Education
As an activity, scuba diving relates to many Scouting adventures
and other merit badge accomplishments. For example, if you
are age 14 or older you can go to the Sea Base in Florida and
continue your diving in the Florida Keys. Under the guidance of
your scuba instructor at Sea Base, you may earn your Open Water
Advanced Open Water certifications. As a certified Scout diver,
you can experience the underwater wilderness as you have never
seen it before.
At the national
Scout jamboree,
you can try diving
and begin your
Scuba Diving merit
badge adventure.
The scuba diving
pools at the
jamboree are
very popular.


82 SCUBA DIVING
Gaining Diving Experience.
Diver Continuing Education
Once you become certified, you will be a beginning diver,
and you can start expanding your diving knowledge and skills
immediately by taking other scuba courses.
First, set your sights on completing an advanced open
water diver course. The course title does not mean you have
to be advanced to take the course, it simply means you will
advance your underwater abilities by taking the course.
Typically, advanced courses include a series of supervised
dives taught by a professional instructor. Advanced courses
introduce you to the basics of special underwater activities. It is
a great way to see what kinds of diving interest you. Advanced
dives include training in underwater navigation and deep
diving, plus other specialty-oriented dives such as night diving,
boat diving, altitude diving, search-and-recovery diving, and
wreck diving.
By completing an advanced open water diver course, you
may find one specialty activity that really excites you. If that
happens you can take an entire course specific to that activity.
Specialty diver courses focus on just one underwater activity
and refine your knowledge and skills in that area.
Rescue divers assist other divers in need. As a rescue diver,
you will learn how to deal with diving emergencies. You may
never need to use these skills, but the challenges of this course
will provide you with the confidence to handle many emergencies.
If you discover that you are really interested in one particular underwater activity,
there is probably a course for it. In diving, these are called specialty courses. Wreck
diving and underwater digital photography are two of the most popular courses.


SCUBA DIVING 83
.Gaining Diving Experience
After completing a rescue course, you can either continue
your training and become a Master Scuba Diver or a Divemaster.
The Master Scuba Diver rating is the highest nonprofessional
rating in recreational diving. During a Divemaster-style
course you will sharpen your dive skills to demonstration
quality, develop a professional-level understanding of
dive knowledge, learn to organize and conduct diving
activities, and learn how to assist professional scuba
instructors while they train beginning divers.
Open Water Diver
PADI Scuba Diver
*Eligible Specialty
PADI Seal Team
Bubblemaker
Discover
Scuba Diving
Skin Diver
Adventure
Diver
Advanced Open
Water Diver
Rescue Diver
Master Scuba
DiverTM
Specialties
Deep Diver
Wreck Diver
Specialty Instructor
Divemaster
Scuba Review
Master Scuba Diver Trainer
IDC Staff Instructor
Course Director
Master Instructor
Open Water Scuba Instructor
Assistant Instructor
Discover
Snorkeling
Emergency First Response®
Provider
Emergency First Response®
Instructor
Emergency First Response®
Instructor Trainer
Specialties
Altitude Diver
AWARE - Fish
Identification
Boat Diver
Digital Underwater
Photographer
Diver Propulsion
Vehicle Diver
Drift Diver
Dry Suit Diver
Enriched Air Diver
Equipment Specialist*
Multilevel Diver
National Geographic
Diver
Night Diver
Peak Performance
Buoyancy
Underwater
Naturalist
Underwater
Navigator
Underwater
Photographer
Underwater
Videographer
Search and Recovery Diver
Semiclosed Rebreather - Dolphin/Atlantis
Specialties
AWARE - Coral Reef Conservation*
Project AWARE Specialist*
Emergency Oxygen Provider*
Digital Underwater Photographer*
(for Snorkelers)
Specialties
Cavern Diver
Ice Diver
Rev. 4/09
Completing a rescue diver course is a real confidence
builder, because you will begin to learn how to assist
other divers in need.





SCUBA DIVING 85
.Diving-Related Career Opportunities
Diving-Related Career
Opportunities
As a Scout, you will first visit the underwater world as a
recreational scuba diver. If you catch the scuba diving “bug”
and become hooked on diving, you may ask yourself,
“When I become an adult, can I make diving my career?”
There are thousands of careers that involve underwater
exploration and adventure. Some involve many years of col-
lege and university training to earn degrees, while some require
“trade school” type accomplishments such as learning to weld,
repair machinery, become a boat captain and other similar skills.
Careers to Explore
Sea Base in Florida offers the opportunity to explore a career in
scuba diving by offering Divemaster and Instructor programs.
You may also want to become a part of the Scuba Team. Here
are some diving professions worth exploring.
Recreational Scuba Instructor
Imagine a career where you look forward to heading off
to work in the morning. As a professional recreational
scuba instructor, you might work at a local dive cen-
ter, at a resort, or on a dive boat. Sailing out into
the ocean to dive every day could be the rule, not
the exception—especially if you work in a tropical
dive destination. Your commute to work could be
as easy as a 10-minute boat ride to an exotic reef.
One of the best things about being a recreational
scuba instructor is that you will get to help others
by teaching them a new recreational activity and
enriching their lives by helping them experience the
adventure of diving.
Regardless of the
diving-related
career you might
train for, it is a life
filled with variety
and adventure.


86 SCUBA DIVING
Diving-Related Career Opportunities.
To become a recreational scuba instructor, you will need
to become a great diver. To become a great diver, you will need
to take more scuba courses and go diving. After you earn your
Scuba Diving merit badge and receive your Open Water Diver
Certification, you may enroll in the following courses: Advanced
Diver, Rescue Diver, and then Divemaster.
These diver ratings were discussed in the chapter called
“Gaining Diving Experience.”
Some scuba instructors continue their training to become
instructor trainers. This position allows them to train others to
become instructors. Other scuba instructors become owners of
professional dive stores and dive resorts on tropical islands.
Commercial Diver
In recreational diving, the emphasis is on the sport—underwater
touring and enjoying the aquatic environment. In
commercial diving, the emphasis is on work that
happens to be underwater. Commercial diving is a trade
that includes inspections, repairs, construction,
cleaning, and other forms of labor.
To succeed as a commercial diver, you
must have good mechanical ability and have
been trained in skills such as welding.
Commercial divers go where there is work.
This rarely means warm, tropical places.
More typically, a commercial diver works
in a cold harbor with little or no underwater
visibility. The offshore oil industry is
one of the major sources of work for
commercial divers.
Commercial divers
often are transported
to their underwater
work site by a diving
bell. A diving bell is a
pressurized “home”
the diver can use to
ride down to the
dive site and back
to the surface in
relative comfort.
Expect to work long days as a recreational scuba instructor,
especially if you work at a popular dive resort. It can be
demanding work, but this exciting profession can be
lots of fun and very rewarding. In addition, becoming
a recreational scuba instructor is an excellent starting
point for many of the other diving-related occupations
you will read about next.
Even though there
are other ways to
do work underwater
(such as using
small submersibles
and remotely
operated vehicles),
commercial divers
remain the most
cost-effective way
of accomplishing
many tasks down
to a depth of
approximately
1,000 feet.


SCUBA DIVING 87
.Diving-Related Career Opportunities
Public Safety Diver
Public safety diving is a broad term for
professions related to underwater crime
and accident investigations or to other community needs, such
as inspecting dams or waterways. A public safety diver also is
usually a police officer, firefighter, sheriff, paramedic, emergency
medical technician (EMT), or some other kind of public service
agent. However, in some areas, public safety divers are special-
ized volunteers who work closely with police and fire services.
As with commercial diving, public safety diving is about
the work, not the diving. Accidents occur everywhere—not
necessarily where you want to dive. Consequently, public safety
diving often takes place in bodies of water that are less than
desirable to visit.
Public safety divers often use
equipment similar to commercial
divers. However, instead of using
air delivered by a hose from the
surface, public safety divers often
use standard scuba cylinders and
full-face masks.
COMPASSBCD
(BUOYANCY
CONTROL DEVICE)
DIVE
COMPUTERWET OR
DRY SUIT
CUTTING
TOOLS
SURFACE
MASK
CYLINDER
SPG
(SUBMERGIBLE
PRESSURE
GAUGE)
WEIGHT
SYSTEM
Commercial divers often
use full helmets, lines
that extend to the surface
for their air supply, very
warm exposure suits, and
a variety of backup safety
equipment. A commercial
diver’s equipment is very
much like the space suits
NASA astronauts wear.
COMMERCIAL
DIVING
HELMET
DRY SUIT
HARNESS
UMBILICAL


88 SCUBA DIVING
Diving-Related Career Opportunities.
Scientific Diver
Scuba diving has become an important scientific tool. Biologists,
oceanographers, archaeologists, geologists, ecologists, and other
scientists rely on scientific diving to gather underwater data
about their fields. In addition to pure research, scientific scuba
diving has become an important tool in applied sciences related
to fisheries management, environmental damage assessments,
and energy development.
To conduct scientific investigations at any depth and location,
scientific diving borrows tools and techniques from virtually
every other type of diving. Although most scientific divers
use standard recreational scuba gear, some scientific
divers also are technical divers or commercial divers.
They may use full-face masks and wireless com-
munication devices.
Scientific divers may work for the govern-
ment, universities, private institutions, or
environmental groups. Often, scientific
divers have advanced degrees in such fields
as marine biology, oceanography, geology,
or archaeology.
Diving has become an important part of scientific research.
Here we see diving scientists conducting a fish survey
underwater, taking underwater measurements, and using
a microscope to examine collected specimens.


SCUBA DIVING 89
.Diving-Related Career Opportunities
Submersible Pilot or ROV Pilot
Diving is a relatively inexpensive, portable, and versatile way to
explore and study the underwater world. However, diving does
have its limitations, which is where deep-diving submersibles—
small submarines—come in. Even using the most sophisticated
diving system, humans exposed to pressure cannot (so far)
perform much meaningful work deeper than about 1,000 feet.
The stresses on the body related to pressure and other
factors become overwhelming. Yet, 1,000 feet does
not even represent 10 percent of the ocean’s average
depth. Many deep-diving submersibles and remotely
operated vehicles (ROVs), on the other hand, can
easily reach depths of 10,000 feet. Their capabili-
ties greatly assist in scientific endeavors and other
kinds of ocean exploration.
A submersible pilot is much like an airline pilot, except the
submersible pilot goes down, rather than up. Submersible pilots
not only “drive” the submersible underwater, but they are often
responsible for the care and maintenance of the submersible while
at its home base, in the field, or while it is being transported. In
addition, most submersible pilots are trained marine biologists
or oceanographers. As they pilot the submersible underwater,
they often assist other scientists onboard (if the submersible
holds more than one person) in doing a survey or study.
Submersibles are small, very deep-diving submarines that scientists
use to explore ocean depths beyond the capabilities of scuba diving.
Submersibles require a human pilot to guide them safely underwater.


90 SCUBA DIVING
Diving-Related Career Opportunities.
A remotely operated vehicle (ROV) combines much of the
portability and affordability of diving with the depth and duration
capabilities of submersibles. A ROV dives without a human at
the helm. ROV pilots work onboard ships, guiding their vehicles
underwater by various switches and joy sticks and receiving
images from the ROV via a television. In a way, operating a ROV
is much like playing a video game!
As a submersible or ROV pilot, you may spend many days
and months at sea. However, these expeditions are often filled
with wonderful discoveries of new species of animals, deep
shipwrecks, and undersea geological formations. You may be the
first person to see sights never before seen by another human.
Military Diver
When you think of military diving, you may think of groups
such as the U.S. Navy SEALS, stealthily slipping behind enemy
lines from underwater. In reality, this is only one type of several
diver roles you can experience as a military diver.
In most countries, the majority of military divers have long,
distinguished careers and perform valuable—often risky—services
for their countries that do not relate directly to combat situations.
Military divers may perform the following tasks.
• Combat swimming. Many operations fall into the category
of combat swimming. These include antiterrorism, hostage/
prisoner rescue, raids, reconnaissance, and other incursions
into enemy territory.
Operating a ROV is much like playing a video game.


SCUBA DIVING 91
.Diving-Related Career Opportunities
• Construction. Military divers using equipment and procedures
similar to those used by commercial divers work in the con-
struction, maintenance, or removal of submerged or partially
submerged structures such as piers, docks, and bridges.
• Rescue. Military rescue divers and swimmers, such as those
in the U.S. Coast Guard, train to aid mariners, trapped subma-
riners, and downed pilots.
• Search and salvage. Military salvage divers recover practice
weapons and military vessels or aircraft that have sunk.
• EOD and demolition. Explosive Ordnance Disposal diving
is one of the most hazardous duties in military diving. EOD
divers must render harmless enemy mines (explosive devices)
or live weapons that have failed to detonate and then dispose
of them.
• Security swims. These are inspections of vessels and struc-
tures for explosives, sabotage, or other signs of tampering.
Military divers conducting this task are not necessarily trained
to disarm explosives; they may simply locate the explosives.
• Vessel maintenance, repair, and inspection. These duties
are similar to those carried out in the civilian world by com-
mercial divers and include hull inspections, cleaning, welding,
and other maintenance or repair tasks.
This diver is a military combat swimmer.
Many types of operations fall into the
category of combat swimming. These
include antiterrorism, hostage/prisoner
rescue, raids, reconnaissance, and other
incursions into enemy territory.
COMPASS
AND GAUGES
DRY SUIT
MIXED GAS OR OXYGEN
CLOSED-CIRCUIT REBREATHER





SCUBA DIVING 93
.Glossary
Glossary
alternate air source. A piece of diving equipment used in an
emergency to give to a buddy who is out of air.
assistant instructor. A leadership certification level in diving
that can include limited teaching duties. May assist fully
certified instructors while preparing for instructor training.
aquatic ecosystem. A specific underwater environment with
a clearly defined physical boundary, distinct physical conditions
(temperature of the water, depth, etc.), at least one energy source
(such as sunlight), and a community of plants, animals, and
other organisms that interact with one another and through
which energy is transferred.
buddy system. When two scuba divers assist each other.
A set of safety procedures that improve divers’ chances
of avoiding or surviving accidents underwater.
buoyancy control device (BCD). An inflatable vest
worn by the diver that can be automatically or orally
inflated to help control buoyancy; also known as a
buoyancy compensator.
certification card (C-card). Proof of completed
diver training and evidence of experience.
closed circuit rebreathers (CCRs). Breathing
equipment that captures, cleanses and
re-oxygenates exhaled breath so that it can
be re-inhaled.
commercial diver. A professional diver doing such
tasks as underwater hunting, welding, recovery,
inspection, and construction.
confined water. Refers to a body of water such as a pool,
or an environment with similar pool-like conditions, such as
a clear and shallow pond, a lake, or a ocean lagoon or bay.
Buoyancy control
device (BCD)


94 SCUBA DIVING
Glossary.
coral reef. Consists of the hard outer skeletons of tiny animals
called corals.
cylinder. The metal container that holds pressurized air for
breathing. Also called a scuba tank.
decompression. Means “releasing pressure.” Any change
from one ambient pressure to a lower ambient pressure always
results in a reduction of gas pressure within the body.
decompression illness (DCI). Refers to both decompression
sickness and lung overexpansion injuries as a single condition,
resulting in overlapping sets of symptoms.
depth gauge. A device that indicates how far a diver is below
the surface.
Divemaster. A professional level diver who leads a group of
less experienced divers underwater. It is also, in some cases,
a certification level that denotes a leadership role in diving,
on a pathway to becoming a recreational scuba instructor.
dive computer. Device that constantly measures depth and
time. Using this information and a preprogrammed algorithm,
the computer calculates and displays the decompression
status of a diver.
dive flag. Special flag used by a boat or on a buoy to indicate
“divers down.”
dive tables. Printed tables that provide divers with a
way of avoiding decompression sickness by giving
the maximum times that can be spent at depth,
and by indicating the decompression stops and
surface intervals needed for a particular depth
and time profile to be carried out safely.
diver certification. A general statement meaning
an individual is taking formal scuba training from
a qualified instructor.
diver propulsion vehicles (DPVs). Motorized,
underwater vehicle used by divers to cover long
distances underwater without having to kick. Also
known as a dive “scooter.”
exposure suit. A specific diving garment used to
reduce heat loss and to protect a diver from minor
scrapes, stings, and abrasions. Examples are wet suits,
dry suits, and rash guards.
Depth gauge
Exposure
suits


SCUBA DIVING 95
.Glossary
ecosystem. A specific environment with a clearly defined
physical boundary, distinct physical conditions (temperature
of the water, depth, etc.), at least one energy source (such
as sunlight), and a community of plants, animals, and other
organisms that interact with one another and through which
energy is transferred.
equalization. The act of forcing air into
an air space (in the body or created by
equipment like a dive mask) to offset
increasing water pressure.
face mask. A skirted glass window
constructed to provide an air space
between the eyes and nose from the water.
Masks permit divers to see underwater and
equalize the air space created by the mask.
fins. Adjustable-strap or full-foot design that
allow a diver’s powerful leg muscles to
move them through the water.
fin pivot. A training skill to help divers
practice attaining neutral buoyancy.
hand signals. A standardized form
of sign system used by scuba divers
to communicate underwater.
military diver. Divers that venture underwater
for the military. May include those that use
diving for war, construction, rescue, search
and salvage, demolition, security swims,
vessel maintenance, repair, and inspection.
nitrogen narcosis. A condition caused by
breathing nitrogen at high pressure at depth.
Causes an anesthetic effect that may result in
a diver making poor judgments and decisions.
open water. A natural, nonpool-like aquatic area
such as a lake, quarry, or an ocean environment.
Open Water Certification. A beginning level of recreational
diver training. Certification allows the holder to purchase
diving equipment and air for scuba cylinders.
polar ecosystem. An ecosystem around the north and south
poles; in the polar seas.
Face mask
Full-foot fin
Adjustable fin


96 SCUBA DIVING
Glossary.
public safety diver. A broad term for professions related to
underwater crime and accident investigations or to other
community needs, such as inspecting dams or waterways.
A public safety diver also is usually a police officer, firefighter,
sheriff, paramedic, emergency medical technician (EMT), or
some other kind of public service agent.
recreational scuba diving. Diving for fun and to prescribed
limits, including a depth no greater than 130 fsw, using only
compressed air, and never requiring a decompression stop.
recreational scuba instructor. An individual that
teaches recreational diving to others as a career.
Recreational Scuba Training Council (RSTC).
A council of recreational diving certification orga-
nizations that regulate the standards of scuba diver
training. Member organizations include International
Diving Educators Association, Professional Diving
Instructors Corporation, Professional Association of
Diving Instructors, Scuba Diving International, and
Scuba Schools International.
regulator. The piece of dive equipment that makes
it possible for divers to use the air in their cylinder. It
reduces the pressure of the air in the scuba cylinder to
match the surrounding water pressure. It delivers air only
when a diver wants it.
ROV pilot. An individual that guides a remotely operated
vehicle (ROV) underwater by various switches and joy sticks,
while receiving images from the ROV via a television.
safety stop. At the end of each dive, a stop during
ascent to the surface at 15 feet for three minutes to
allow excess nitrogen to leave a diver’s body.
scientific diver. Professional divers that use scuba as a
scientific tool. Examples are biologists, oceanographers,
archaeologists, geologists, ecologists, and other
scientists rely on scientific diving to gather
underwater data about their fields.
scuba. Acronym meaning self-contained
underwater breathing apparatus.
snorkel. A piece of equipment that
allows divers to rest or swim with
their face in the water. Snorkel


SCUBA DIVING 97
.Glossary
specialized diving. Diving beyond an entry-level (beginner)
that requires more training. Examples include night diving,
cavern and cave diving, wreck diving, and deep diving.
squeezes. A response by an enclosed air space (sinuses,
middle ear, inside a mask) to increasing underwater pressure
during descent. A scuba diver may be injured by failing
to equalize these air spaces, either while descending
or ascending.
submersible. Small deep-diving submarines.
submersible pressure gauge (SPG). Gauge attached to
the regulator, used to monitor pressure (the amount of air)
remaining in the scuba cylinder.
technical diving. A form of SCUBA diving that exceeds the
scope of recreational diving, allowing deeper and longer dives.
temperate marine ecosystem. A cooler, but still mild,
marine environment. The west coast of the United States
and areas along the northeastern coast of North America
can be considered temperate.
timing device. Dive equipment such as dive watches or
special underwater timers that are pressure-activated
stopwatches, used to determine dive time at depth.
visibility. The vertical distance a diver can see underwater
measured in feet.
weight system. A piece of diving equipment helps divers
to overcome the buoyancy of their body and equipment.
May be a weight belt or lead weight integrated into a BCD.
Weight system


With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
98 SCUBA DIVING
Scuba Diving Resources.
Scouting Literature
Archaeology, First Aid, Lifesaving,
Oceanography, Swimming, Water Sports,
and Weather merit badge pamphlets
Books
Shreeves, Karl. Open Water Diver Manual.
PADI, 2007.
Shreeves, Karl. Adventures in Diving
Manual. PADI, 2007.
Wohlers, Robert. Life on an Ocean
Planet. Current Publishing, 2010.
Organizations and Websites
Dive RAID International
diveraid.com
Historical Diving Society
www.hds.org
International Association of Nitrox
and Technical Divers
iantd.com
International Diving Educators
Association (IDEA)
www.idea-scuba.com
National Academy of Scuba
Educators (NASE)
www.naseworldwide.org
National Association of Underwater
Instructors (NAUI)
www.naui.org
PADI AWARE Foumdation
www.padi.com/aware
Professional Association of
Diving Instructors (PADI)
www.padi.com
Scuba Diving International (SDI)
www.tdisdi.com
Scuba Educators
www.scubaeducators.org
Scuba and Nitrox Safety
International (SNSI)
www.scubasnsi.com
Scuba Schools International (SSI)
www.divessi.com
(World) Recreational Scuba
Training Council (RSTC)
www.wrstc.com
Scuba Diving Resources


SCUBA DIVING 99
.Scuba Diving Resources
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks PADI Americas
for its assistance with the development
of the Scuba Diving merit badge and its
support in the production of this first
edition of the merit badge pamphlet.
Scouting America has long appreciated a
mutual and supportive relationship with
this highly regarded diving agency. That
collaboration continues today through a
memorandum of understanding between
Scouting America and PADI.
Special thanks to PADI’s Brad Smith,
Emergency First Response director,
Business Development and Education,
who was instrumental in the development
of the merit badge and pamphlet from
beginning to end. We appreciate Robert
Wohlers, instructional design and
development executive, for writing the
manuscript, for his technical expertise,
and for allowing Scouting America to
use so many of his wonderful photo-
graphs that depict the underwater world.
Thanks also to Janelle Hamm, marketing
manager; Dawn Azua, supervisor, Media
Productions; Karl Shreeves, technical
development executive; Kimberly Sickel,
graphic designer; and Brooke Schnetz,
media production coordinator.
Scouting America is grateful to
Steve Willis, retired associate director,
Program, Sea Base, and volunteers Jay
Fox and Bob Tallent. These dedicated
Scouters provided substantial input.
Thanks to members of the Scouting
America Aquatics Task Force (Terry
Budd, chair) for their crucial input, so
integral in keeping our participants safe
in and on the water.


100 SCUBA DIVING
Scuba Diving Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Jurg Beeli—page 75 (tubeworms)
Florida National High Adventure Sea
Base/Jennifer Russell, courtesy—
pages 81 and 96 (top)
David Fleetham/PADI—cover (nautilus);
pages 24 (right), 51 (top right), and
66 (bottom)
M. Grady/Ocean Explorer, NOAA—
page 88 (top)
Harbor Branch Oceanographic, courtesy
—pages 89 (left) and 90
Paul Hayes, courtesy—page 91
Historical Diver Magazine, courtesy—
page 32 (top)
Historical Diving Society, courtesy;
http://www.hds.org—pages 30 (both),
31 (both), 32 (bottom two), and 33
(top; woman in early scuba gear)
Al Hornsby—pages 28 (bottom),
29 (octopus), and 68 (right)
Jupiterimages.com—pages 22, 37 (top),
and 99
Kayuba Dive Club—page 66 (top)
Justin Lewis/PADI—cover (sea turtle,
jellyfish, stingray); pages 34, 44,
76 (top), 78 (bottom), 80, 82 (both),
and 92
Rick Loomis—pages 13, 37 (top),
and 54
NASA, courtesy—pages 26, 27 (top),
and 71 (top)
Phil Nuytten, courtesy—page 89 (right)
OAR/NURP/NOAA, courtesy—
page 71 (bottom)
PADI—cover (cylinder, wrist gauge,
divers); pages 6, 9–10 (all), 12–14
(all), 16, 19 (both), 24, 27 (bottom),
33 (modern scuba equipment), 35–36
(all), 37 (bottom three), 38–43 (all),
46–47 (all), 48 (bottom), 49–50 (all),
51 (left center), 52–59 (all), 60 (top),
61–63 (all), 66 (center), 68 (bottom
left), 69, 72 (both), 73 (left), 74, 75
(top two, flatworm), 78 (top), 79, 83
(both), 85–87 (all), 88 (bottom),
93–94 (all), 96 (bottom), 97, and 99
Dr. Martin Sayer—page 76 (bottom)
Sara Shoemaker-Lind/PADI—
page 73 (right)
Karl Shreeves—pages 64, 65, and 77
Donald Tipton/PADI—pages 29
(dolphins) and 70 (inset)
Michel Verdue—page 28 (top)
Andy Voeltz/PADI—page 67 (all)
Bob Wohlers—cover (starfish, spotted
fish); pages 24 (left), 29 (grouper,
angelfish, sea anemone, sea turtle,
squirrelfish), 70 (background), 75
(sponge, lobster), and 84
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting America.
John McDearmon—illustrations on
pages 45, 48 (top), 51 (bottom),
60 (bottom)
Michael Roytek—page 27 (bottom)