SHOTGUN
SHOOTING
STEM-Based


SHOTGUN
SHOOTING
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Note to the Counselor
The merit badge counselor must take responsibility to assure that all
instruction involving any handling of firearms or live ammunition must
be supervised by a currently certified Scouting America National Camping
School (NCS) range and target activities director or certified National Rifle
Association (NRA) Shotgun Instructor.
Instruction involving muzzleloading shotguns must be supervised by
an NCS range and target activities director or NRA/National Muzzleloader
Rifle Association (NMLRA)–certified muzzleloading shotgun instructor.
Shooting must be supervised by an NRA-certified Range Safety
Officer (RSO).
If instruction and shooting are to occur at the same time, both the
RSO and NRA instructor must be present. The NRA Range Safety Officer
and NRA instructor may not be the same person. Note that commercial
shooting ranges may provide RSOs. See the Guide to Safe Scouting and
the Scouting America National Range and Target Activities Manual, No.
30931, for further details on range and target activities.
It is recommended that the merit badge counselor use the current
Shotgun Shooting merit badge pamphlet, No. 35948, and the “NRA FIRST
Steps Shotgun Orientation Instructor’s Lesson Plans/Scouting America
Shotgun Shooting Merit Badge Teaching Guide” found in the National
Range and Target Activities Manual, No. 30931.
Shotguns
The following standards are established for Scouts and Venturers
regarding shotgun usage.
1. Modern sporting shotguns of any gauge may be used. However,
experience shows that beginning shooters will be more successful with
a 20- or 12-gauge shotgun, putting more shot to the target. Youth- and
adult-size gas-operated semiautomatic shotguns are recommended.
35948
ISBN 978-0-8395-3331-3
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
FPO


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 3
2. Current manufactured shotshells of the appropriate gauge containing
No. 7 1
⁄2 to No. 9 shot may be used. A shot size larger than No. 7 1
⁄2
is not to be used. Reloads may not be used in Scouting America range
and target activities programs.
3. Shooting safety glasses and hearing protection must be worn on
shotgun ranges.
4. Care must be taken to comply with federal, state, and local laws.
Muzzleloaders
The following standards for muzzleloading shotguns are to be used by
members of Scouting America.
1. Only recently manufactured (or assembled from a kit) percussion cap
muzzleloading shotguns no smaller than 20 gauge or greater than 10
gauge are to be used. Flintlock shotguns are not approved for use in
Scouting America range and target activities programs. Shotguns made
from kits must be checked by a qualified gunsmith.
2. Only a commercially manufactured black powder substitute offered for
sale by a reputable firm should be used in muzzleloading shotguns.
For new shooters, the amount of propellant in grains should be at the
minimum of the gun manufacturer’s recommended load range.
3. Shooting safety glasses and hearing protection must be worn on
shotgun ranges.
4. Care must be taken to comply with federal, state, and local laws.


4 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Shotgun-Shooting or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 5


6 SHOTGUN SHOOTING


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 7


8 SHOTGUN SHOOTING


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 9
Contents
Shotgun Parts . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Shotgun Ammunition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Shotgun Safety . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Choosing a Shotgun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
Clay Target Sports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
Muzzleloading Shotguns . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Conservation and Hunting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 86
Shotgun Shooting Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94


10 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Parts.
Shotgun Parts
A shotgun is a precision instrument, designed to shoot a shot
charge in a specific pattern to cover a designated area at a
certain distance. Unlike a rifle, the bore of the shotgun is not
rifled, so the shot emerging from the muzzle is not spinning.
A shotgun is built to last a lifetime. By itself, the shotgun
poses no greater threat to person or property than any other
machine. If you understand your gun—how it works, how to
use it safely, and how to care for it—shooting will be pleasurable
and rewarding.
The Stock
The stock is the part of the shotgun the shooter grasps. It has
a special significance in proper shooting. It is designed to let
you point and shoot accurately. Each part of the stock has a
special name.
The butt is the rear end of the stock. It’s the part that rests
against your shoulder when you point the shotgun.
The comb is the part of the stock that is brought to your
cheek as you assume the shooting position.
The grip is the part of the stock held with the trigger hand.
It sometimes is referred to as the small of the stock because it
is where the stock narrows.
Shotgun parts
BUTT
COMB GRIP
LOADING
PORT CHAMBER BARREL RIB
SAFETY TRIGGER
TRIGGER GUARD
ACTION RELEASE
MAGAZINE
LOADING PORT
FOREARM
MUZZLE
BEAD


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 11
.Shotgun Parts
The part of the stock that lies under the barrel is called
the forearm, or fore-end. On most shotguns, the forearm is
separate from the rest of the stock.
The Barrel
The barrel is the metal tube through which the shot passes
on its way to the target. The inside portion of the barrel is
called the bore, and its diameter will vary depending on the
size of the gun. Most shotgun bores are designated by a term
known as gauge. The smaller the gauge number, the larger
the bore diameter.
Starting with the largest bore, most modern shotguns are
available in 10, 12, 16, 20, and 28 gauge. The lone exception
to this measuring system is the .410 bore shotgun, the smallest
of the modern shotguns. It has a bore measured by the same
standards as rifles and pistols.
Modern shotguns are loaded at the rear, or breech, end
of the barrel by inserting a round of ammunition known as
the shotshell into the part of the barrel called the chamber.
The front of the barrel—where the shot exits the gun—is
called the muzzle.
The .410 shotgun
has a bore
that is 410/1,000
of an inch in
diameter. While
it is commonly
referred to as
the .410 gauge,
the gun actually
is a 67 gauge.
Popular shotshell gauges, with circles representing the shell’s actual diameter.
10 GAUGE 12 GAUGE 16 GAUGE 20 GAUGE 28 GAUGE .410 BORE


12 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Parts.
The Choke
Most shotguns have, near the muzzle, an important constriction
called the choke. Shot begins to spread out as soon as it exits
the muzzle, so the more constricted the shot is at the time it’s
expelled, the farther it will travel as a compact group. The choke’s
function is to constrict the shot. The greater the choke, the greater
the constriction and generally the greater the effective range of the
gun and shot pattern.
Most commonly, a full-choke shotgun barrel has the most
constriction and the greatest range. However, at close range a
full-choke pattern may be too small to consistently hit moving
targets or so dense that game is ruined by blanket shot.
Full choke
Modified choke
Improved cylinder
choke
42-INCH OPTIMUM
PATTERN AT 40 TO
45 YARDS
45 YARDS
45 YARDS
42-INCH OPTIMUM
PATTERN AT 35 YARDS
42-INCH OPTIMUM
PATTERN AT 25 YARDS
35 YARDS
While the most
common chokes
are discussed
here, there are
many variations
in between. For
information about
the choke on your
shotgun, consult
the manufacturer’s
user manual.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 13
.Shotgun Parts
Modified choke creates somewhat less constriction than full
choke. Improved cylinder choke creates even less constriction,
providing a shot pattern that widens out more quickly than
the preceding two. A shotgun barrel that has no choke at all is
referred to as a cylinder bore. Generally, choke designations are
indicated on the outside of the barrel.
Many companies today manufacture shotguns with inter-
changeable screw-in chokes. Or, a device known as an adjust-
able choke can be placed on the end of the barrel to allow the
user to adjust choke selections. Both of these options are good
if one gun is to serve multiple purposes.
The Action
The moving parts that permit you to load, fire, and unload your
shotgun are known as the action. Most of these parts are housed
in a metal frame called a receiver. Many different methods have
been designed for operating the action. Among the most common
types are break action, pump, hinge, and semiautomatic. In each
case, the ultimate function is the same.
By opening the action, you usually are causing the firing pin
spring to compress and allowing a shotshell to be loaded into the
chamber at the breech end of the barrel. Closing the action on
most shotguns means the gun is cocked and ready for firing.
The pointing mechanism on shotguns is rather simple.
One or sometimes two beads are positioned on the
top of the barrel to help the shooter point at the target.
Some shotguns also have a rib that runs the length of
the barrel and gives the shooter an added tracking aid.
The ribbed surface also helps keep the barrel cooler
during heavy fire.


14 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Parts.
When the gun has been loaded and the action closed, place
the safety in the “on” position. Move the safety to the “off”
position right before firing. Once the gun is cocked and the safety
off, you can point the shotgun at the target and pull the trigger,
which drives the firing pin forward. When the firing pin strikes
the primer in the base of the shell case, the shotshell will fire.
Once the shot is fired, you can reopen the action to either
eject or remove the fired case. On most shotguns, opening
the action will eject the fired case automatically. Then, a
new shotshell can be loaded, the action closed, and the gun
fired again.
Action Types
Pump. The actions of the pump-type shotguns are opened and
closed by pumping the forearm of the stock back and forth.
Pump actions are sometimes called slide actions.
Semiautomatic shotgun
To open or close the action on many firearms after
loading, you must activate the action release button
or lever.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 15
.Shotgun Parts
Hinge. Similar to the movement of a door hinge, a shotgun’s
break action can be opened when the release lever on top of the
action is pushed to one side, separating the standing breechblock
from the barrel. Based on placement, these actions are referred
to as either “over and unders” or “side by sides.”
Over and under
(hinge) shotgun
and action
Side-by-side (hinge) shotgun and action


16 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Parts.
Semiautomatic, or autoloading. The semiautomatic action oper-
ates automatically when the shot is fired. In most semiautomatic
shotguns, gas from the burning gunpowder provides the energy
needed to operate the action and load the next shell. This type of
action delivers less recoil, or kick, to the shooter.
The Magazine
Most shotgun actions can be loaded manually, one shell at
a time. Many, however, have a magazine to help speed up
loading. The magazine is a container attached to the gun
into which several shells can be placed. Closing the action on
loaded shotguns equipped with a magazine will allow a new
shell to be placed in the chamber. The gun can be fired
successively until the magazine is empty.
Of the two basic types of magazines, the most common is a tube type positioned
under the barrel, as shown. The second is a box type located directly under the receiver.
Semiautomatic shotgun and action


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 17
.Shotgun Parts
The Safety
Regardless of the type of action employed, all modern shotguns
come equipped with a mechanical safety to help guard against
unwanted firing. A loaded shotgun should be carried only
when the safety is on.
Under no circumstances should a gun’s
safety be substituted for a shooter’s good
safety habits. As mechanical devices, safeties
are subject to malfunction and shooter error.
Therefore, even when the safety is in the
“on” position, the responsible shooter always
treats the gun as if firing were possible.
While they serve two distinct functions, the safety and action release of a shotgun
are both small levers that can be located at varying places on the gun.
SAFETY
ACTION RELEASE
On shotguns with
two barrels and
only one trigger, the
safety button usually
also functions as a
selector to determine
which barrel will
fire first.


18 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Ammunition.
Shotgun Ammunition
The modern shotgun shell contains the five components
required for firing the shot: the case, primer, powder charge,
wad, and shot.
• The shell case is the outer container
for all other ammunition parts.
It typically is made of plastic or
paper with a metal base.
• The primer is the detonating agent
contained in the middle of the
shell’s base. When the firing pin
strikes the primer, a chain of events
begins to fire the gun.
• A powder charge above the
primer allows easy combustion
from the flame created when the
primer detonates.
• A plastic or fiber wad separates
the shot from the powder, forming
a seal that allows the gases created
by the burning powder to push the
shot down the barrel.
• Shot are small round projectiles
usually made of lead or steel and
are located at the front end of
the shell. Depending on the gauge
and shot size, one shell may
contain anywhere from nine to
700 of them.
To understand these components, you
must understand the way modern
firearms work.
CASE
SHOT
WAD
POWDER
PRIMER


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 19
.Shotgun Ammunition
How Shotgun Ammunition Fires
A shot begins when the shotgun’s trigger is pulled and ends
when the shot is expelled from the barrel. The first step occurs
when the trigger is pulled and the firing pin strikes the primer,
causing its priming compound to detonate. The flame generated
by the primer ignites the powder charge. The rapidly burning
powder generates a high volume of gases under tremendous pres-
sure. Because the breech end of a shotgun is blocked and the
muzzle is open, the gases will seek the path of least resistance
through the bore and out the muzzle. In the way of these gases
are the wad and shot, but because they give the least resistance,
the gases push them along and out the muzzle. All this is done
in a split second—at a velocity of about 1,250 feet per second.
This velocity diminishes as the shot travels until it falls to Earth
at a range of about 300 yards. After 50 to 60 yards, however,
the shot has lost velocity and energy, and the pattern has
become so widely dispersed that it is not likely to be effective
on moving targets.
Shot Size
Identification
No.
Shot diameter
(inches)
Number of lead
shot in an ounce
Common
uses
No. 9 .08 585 Skeet, woodcock, quail
No. 8 .09 410 Trap, skeet, dove, quail,
woodcock
No. 71
⁄2 .095 350 Trap, dove, grouse, quail,
pheasant, crow
No. 6 .11 225 Grouse, pheasant, rabbit,
squirrel, crow
No. 5 .12 170 Pheasant, grouse, rabbit,
squirrel, turkey
No. 4 .13 135 Ducks, turkey
No. 2 .15 90 Turkey, ducks


20 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Ammunition.
Using the Right Ammunition
The kind of ammunition you use will depend on the gauge
of the gun and the kind of shooting you will do. Use only the
shotshells that are right for your shotgun. Usually, modern
shotguns are stamped on the barrel to indicate the gauge and
the length of the shotshell. The base of the shell case is also
commonly marked with the gauge of the cartridge and its
manufacturer. Be sure the gauges on the gun and shotshell
match. Ammunition manufacturers mark the boxes in which
they pack their products with the gauge, shot size, powder
charge, and shell length. Buy only the gauge and length
appropriate for the gun, and the shot size and powder charge
suitable for the intended use. Always check the local rules and
regulations for type of shot that is permitted in your location.
Most muzzleloaders can only use lead shot.
The length of a
shotshell is its
length in a fired
condition. Using a
shotshell longer
than that for
which the gun
is designed can
destroy the gun
and may cause
serious injury
to the shooter
and bystanders.
FIRING PIN STRIKES PRIMER.
PRIMER DETONATES.
POWDER IS IGNITED.
BURNING POWDER FORMS GASES.
EXPANDING HOT GASES
PROPEL PROJECTILE.
Use the proper gauge of ammunition for your shotgun. Take the time to ensure that
the proper gauge is the same on the ammunition box, shells, and shotgun.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 21
.Shotgun Ammunition
Ammunition Malfunctions
While modern ammunition generally is very reliable,
the shooter occasionally may encounter a shotshell
malfunction. There are three types of shotshell
malfunctions: hangfire, misfire, and squib load.
The waiting time after an apparent misfire is to
ensure that you actually have not experienced a hang-
fire—a perceptible delay in the ignition of a shotshell
after the firing pin strikes the primer. By keeping the
gun pointed in a safe direction, no one will be harmed
and no property damaged by the delayed ignition.
A misfire is a total failure of the shotshell to fire
after the primer has been struck by the firing pin.
When the trigger is pulled and nothing happens, keep
the shotgun pointed in a safe direction for at least
30 seconds before opening the action.
A squib load is the development of less than nor-
mal pressure or velocity after ignition of the shotshell.
If anything unusual is noticed when a shot is fired, such
as a difference in recoil or noise, stop firing immedi-
ately. The wad may still be in the barrel. Firing another
shotshell in a barrel obstructed by a stuck wad could
cause serious injury or damage. Keep the muzzle point-
ed in a safe direction and unload the gun. Check to be
certain that the chamber is empty, then with the action
open, check to see that the wad has not remained in
the bore. With a break action shotgun you will be able
to simply look into the breech end of the barrel. With
other action types you will need to run a cleaning rod
into the barrel from the muzzle end to assure that the
bore is clear. Do not look through the muzzle! If the wad
remains in the barrel, push it out with the cleaning rod
before reloading.


The Scout’s Marksmanship Code
A Scout:
• Always follows the rules for firearms safety.
• Accepts the responsibility that goes with the use and possession
of firearms.
• Follows the laws that govern the use and possession of firearms
in the local community.
• Practices wildlife conservation.
• Follows the spirit and the letter of the game laws.
• Is especially careful to demonstrate true sportsmanship when
using firearms.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 23
.Shotgun Safety
Safety knowledge
and skills are of
little value without
a determination
to use them all of
the time.
Shotgun Safety
In marksmanship, nothing is more important than safety.
Participants in range and target activities assume a vital respon-
sibility that affects the lives of others. It is critically important to
learn and practice all of the shotgun safety rules.
When handled correctly and used properly, a shotgun is
not dangerous. A shotgun, like any other precision machine,
instrument, or piece of sports equipment, is manufactured to
perform a specific task and can do so at no risk to the user or
others. If a shotgun is handled incorrectly or recklessly, without
regard for the safety rules, then accidents can happen.
Shotgun safety is a simple but ongoing process. You must
first acquire knowledge of how to handle shotguns safely, then
develop and maintain proper safe-handling skills through
practice. The most important element to being safe is attitude.
Being safe means consciously keeping the gun under control.
Always be alert to, and conscious of, the shot-
gun’s capabilities, and be aware of what might
happen if it is used improperly.
Basic gun safety rules fall into two major
categories: safe gun handling and safe use
and storage.
Fundamental Rules for Safe
Gun Handling
Three basic rules apply to handling a shotgun—
under any circumstances.
1. ALWAYS keep the gun pointed in a safe
direction. Never point the muzzle at yourself
or others. Common sense will tell you which
direction is safest depending on your location
and other conditions.


24 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Safety.
2. ALWAYS keep your finger off the trigger until ready to
shoot. There’s a natural tendency to put your finger on the
trigger when picking up or handling a gun. Don’t do it! Your
gun has a trigger guard. It’s there to protect your trigger—to
enable you to hold the gun comfortably with your finger off
the trigger.
3. ALWAYS keep the gun unloaded until ready to use. Treat
any gun as if it were loaded and ready to go off. Treat every
gun as if it were loaded whether at home, on the range,
or in the field. This means you never let the gun point at
you or anyone else. Whenever you pick up a gun, open
the action and check (visually, if possible) to see that the
chamber is unloaded. If the gun has a magazine, make sure
it’s empty. If you don’t know how to open the action, leave
it alone or get help from someone who’s knowledgeable.
Remember, even if you’re sure that it’s not loaded, always
point the gun in a safe direction. By handling unloaded guns
in the same manner as loaded ones, you’re helping establish
sound handling habits and will never have to say, “I thought
the gun was empty.”


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 25
.Shotgun Safety
An open, empty gun is safe! Open the action and remove
the magazine, or be sure it’s empty. Be sure the chamber is
empty. Leave the action open. When the gun is in this condition
it is safe. But the moment you close the action, you must treat
the gun as if it were loaded and ready to fire whether there is
ammunition in it or not.
Be aware that removing the magazine from the gun does not
unload it! Removing the magazine does not take the cartridge
out of the chamber.
BB and Pellet Air Guns
Air guns are not toys. Today’s air gun is a technically
sophisticated and precise instrument. Everything in this
merit badge pamphlet—on safe gun handling, shooting
stance, fundamentals of firing, hygiene, and etiquette—
also applies to air guns.
Always wear eye protection when shooting a BB
or pellet air gun. Steel BBs can ricochet off wooden
or metal target frames, causing injury and property
damage. It’s best to hang BB targets from a string
suspended between two posts, secured at the top
and bottom.


26 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Safety.
Most of this discussion has centered on using the modern
cartridge type of firearm. Additional safety rules apply for the
muzzleloader. It is loaded by putting a measured amount of
powder down the muzzle. The shot is also put through the
muzzle on top of a wad that separates the powder and shot.
Then another wad is inserted to hold the shot in place.
There’s no way your eye can tell whether the muzzleloader
is loaded. The best way to determine this is to put the ramrod
down through the muzzle when there’s no charge in the gun.
Mark the ramrod at the muzzle. From this point on, you can
tell whether the gun is loaded. Put the gun on half cock and
carefully remove the cap if there is one on the nipple. Put the
ramrod down through the muzzle until it hits bottom. Check
the position of the marking on the ramrod. If the mark is above
the muzzle, the gun is loaded.
If your shotgun is a flintlock, remove all powder from the
flash pan. This is the powder lighted by the flint flash. Then
conduct the ramrod test to see if it is loaded.
Rules for Using or Storing a Shotgun
When actually engaged in shooting—whether in hunting,
recreational practice, or competition—always follow these rules.
• Know your target and what’s beyond. Be absolutely sure
you have identified your target without any doubt. Also be
sure of the area beyond your target. This means observing
the prospective firing area before you shoot. Never fire in a
direction where there are people or where any other potential
for mishap might exist. Think first. Shoot second.
• Know how to use a shotgun safely. Before handling your
gun, learn how it operates. Know its basic parts and how
to safely open, load, and close the action, and remove any
ammunition from the chamber or magazine if it is loaded.
Remember, a gun’s mechanical safety device is never
foolproof. The safety device can never replace safe
gun handling.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 27
.Shotgun Safety
• Be sure the gun is safe to operate. Just like other tools,
guns need regular maintenance to remain in good working
order. Regular cleaning and proper storage are a part of the
gun’s general upkeep. If there is any question about a gun’s
ability to function, a qualified gunsmith should look at it. Be
especially careful to keep the bore clear of obstructions such
as mud, snow, or a stuck wad. Firing a shot in an obstructed
barrel can cause the barrel to burst, resulting in severe injury
to the shooter and those nearby.
• Use only the correct ammunition for the gun. Only car-
tridges or shells designed for a particular gun can be fired in
that gun. Most guns have the cartridge or shell type stamped
on the barrel. Ammunition may be identified by information
printed on the box and stamped on each cartridge. Do not
fire the gun if there’s any question about the compatibility
of the gun and ammunition.
• Wear hearing and eye protection. Shots fired from guns
are loud, and the noise can damage the hearing of shooters
and bystanders. Also, debris and hot gases that could cause
eye injury are emitted from gunshots. For these reasons,
shooters should wear shooting glasses and hearing protection.
Carry only one gauge or caliber of ammunition when shooting. Be sure it
is right for the shooting you will be doing. You would have trouble hitting
a clay target with No. 2 shot instead of No. 9 shot. When you’re through
shooting, remove unfired ammunition from clothing to avoid accidentally
mixing different ammunition the next time you go shooting.
Always wear hearing and eye protection when you are around firearms.


28 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Safety.
• Never use alcohol or drugs before or while shooting.
Alcohol, or any other substances likely to impair normal
mental or physical functions (including prescription and non-
prescription medicines), must not be used before or while
handling or shooting guns.
• Store guns so they are not accessible to unauthor-
ized persons. Deciding where and how to store guns and
ammunition depends on several factors, such as security and
accessibility. Safe and secure storage requires that untrained
individuals (especially children) be denied access to guns
and ammunition.
Be aware that certain types of guns and many shooting activities
require additional safety precautions. If you plan to go hunting,
you will need to learn how to safely carry the shotgun, how to
cross obstacles safely, and much more. Remember, when in your
home, at the range, or in the field, you alone are responsible for
gun safety.
On occasion you may meet experienced shooters who have
grown careless, or novices who might be unfamiliar with the
safety precautions. A good example of this is someone resting
the gun muzzle on his or her toe. This is not safe. Do not be
swayed or impressed by such foolishness. Always exercise great
caution and responsibility whenever you are handling firearms.
Cleaning Your Shotgun
Your shotgun is a piece of precision equipment. Like any item of
value, it must be given proper care if it is to operate correctly and
safely. Unlike many items of sports equipment, your shotgun is
built to last a lifetime. And it will if you regularly care for it.
Ideally, you should make a habit of cleaning your shotgun
each time it is used. Cleaning preserves the finish and value
of the shotgun and helps it shoot more accurately and reliably.
Cleaning is needed when the shotgun has been stored for an
extended period or has been exposed to dirt or moisture. Do
not start shooting with a dirty gun. Be sure it is cleaned
thoroughly before use.
If you get into a
situation where
others refuse to
follow the safety
rules—do not
shoot with them.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 29
.Shotgun Safety
Before you begin to clean your shotgun, point it in a safe
direction, open the action, and be absolutely sure that the
gun is empty and all ammunition is removed from the
area. To ensure absolute safety, always keep the action open
during cleaning.
Six basic materials are needed to clean a gun that fires by
cartridge or gunpowder. These are:
• Cleaning rod with attachments. The attachments must be
the proper size for the bore of the gun.
• Cloth patches, available commercially or made at home
from absorbent cloth, to remove foreign particles from the
barrel’s interior surface and to apply solvent or lubricant.
• Bore-cleaning solvent that dissolves powder residue.
• Light gun oil to apply to the moving parts of the gun.
Check the manufacturer’s recommendation.
• A clean cloth to clean the exterior parts of the gun. The
cloth should be free of dirt and moisture.
• A small brush like a toothbrush for cleaning the smallest
parts of your gun.
BORE-CLEANING
SOLVENT GUN OIL
CLOTH PATCH
ATTACHMENTS
CLOTH PATCHES BORE BRUSH
ATTACHMENTBORE MOP
ATTACHMENT
CLEANING ROD
(SHOWN WITH
EXTENSIONS HERE)


30 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Safety.
Steps in Cleaning
Step 1—Place a cleaning patch
on the cleaning rod, wet with
cleaning solvent, and work it
back and forth in the bore to
loosen residue. If the bore is
very dirty, substitute a brass or
bronze cleaning brush and repeat
the brushing until most of the
residue is loosened. Then repeat
with a moistened patch. Avoid
putting a dirty patch or brush
into the main supply of solvent.
Use a separate container.
Step 2—Thoroughly dry the bore
by repeating the above process,
using three or four clean, dry
patches. Continue until a patch
comes through clean after
running the length of the barrel.
1
2


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 31
.Shotgun Safety
Step 3—Wipe all the exterior parts of the gun with a clean
cloth, being particularly careful to remove any accumulated
grease or dirt from the gun’s moving parts. This is where the
toothbrush will be needed.
Step 4—Check all removable parts of the gun—including
stock, screws, magazine, tube cap, and similar parts—to be
sure they are all fastened tightly.
Step 5—After all the metallic surfaces have been cleaned and
dried, protect them during storage by wiping down with a
clean cloth lightly moistened with gun oil. Avoid getting oil or
solvents on the wood stock or forearm.
3
4


32 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Safety.
Steps for a Quick Cleaning
Follow these simple steps in the field or at the range. Use a
rope/cable cleaning device such as the Hoppe’s BoreSnake®,
shown here.
Step 1—Apply a small amount of bore-cleaning solvent to
the head of the rope/cable cleaning device, just ahead of the
bronze bristles.
Step 2—Apply a few drops of light gun oil to the tail of
the device.
Step 3—Drop the brass weight on the device through the
opened action and down the bore, pulling it through until it
comes out of the muzzle.
Congratulations. The bore is now completely cleaned and
protected from the harmful effects of carbon buildup, metal
fouling, and moisture.
TAIL—APPLY GUN
OIL HERE.
BORE BRUSH—EMBEDDED IN
THE CORD AND LOOSENS
HARD DEPOSITS.
WEIGHTED CORD—SLIPS EASILY
THROUGH THE BARREL. GRASP AND
PULL THE CLEANING CORD THROUGH
THE BORE. THE CALIBER OR GAUGE IS
STAMPED INTO THE BRASS WEIGHT.
HEAD—REMOVES
FOREIGN PARTICLES
PRIOR TO THE
SCRUBBING ACTION
OF THE BRUSH.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 33
.Shotgun Safety
Shooting Hygiene
It is a good practice not to eat or drink when shooting. You
should wash your hands and face after you shoot. It is also a
good idea to change your clothes if you shoot for hours at a time.
If you don’t practice good hygiene, you increase your chances of
ingesting the lead dust and raising the lead content in your body.
On the shooting range, dirt, dust, and the oils from your shotgun
and ammunition are good reasons for practicing good hygiene
and keeping yourself clean. Remember, a Scout is clean.
Gun Repairs
Do not try to repair any part of your shotgun that appears to be
malfunctioning or broken. Even the most minor repairs should
be left to an expert; any improper repair could cause your gun
to fire improperly or cause further damage—with potentially
hazardous results. At the least, you could irreparably damage
your shotgun. Don’t take chances. Take your shotgun to an
experienced gunsmith to solve your problem.
Sensible Storage
Before you decide how and where you will store guns and
ammunition, consider safety, storage conditions, access by
others, and your personal needs. Many people are intrigued by
guns, and the temptation to pick one up is very real for adults
and children alike. That could spell trouble if the person is too
young or inexperienced to handle the gun safely. Security is
another factor. Unfortunately, guns are often desirable booty
for thieves.
For all these reasons, it’s wise to find a secure and conve-
nient location for your shooting equipment. Many manufacturers
offer fine wooden cabinets to display and secure guns. Some gun
owners prefer to lock their guns in metal vaults or storage places
where they are out of sight and out of reach. If you choose storage
that requires a lock, be sure to keep your keys in a place where
casual visitors and youngsters are not likely to find them.
Ammunition should be kept in a cool, dry place. Gun
owners should store ammunition separately from guns to
minimize the chance of an accident.


34 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Safety.
Transporting Your Shotgun
State and local regulations vary. You must make it your business
to learn what laws apply where you live, at points in transit, and
at your destination. Some places have ordinances restricting fire-
arm transport. Part of your obligation as a responsible shooter is
to know and comply with the laws. To obtain information about
laws in your area, contact your local law enforcement agency
or the National Rifle Association’s Grassroots Division of the
Institute for Legislative Action.
There are many areas of safety and protection not covered in this sec-
tion. Think about a few examples and what you could do about them. For
example, when hunting in the field, you come to a fence. How can you
and your gun get safely to the other side? Remember to deactivate your
gun as the first step. Open the action and remove all ammunition. Place
your gun carefully on the ground under the lower wire or rail of the fence.
Then walk to a fencepost away from your gun. Climb the fence and cross
to the other side. Then carefully pick up your gun in such a way that the
muzzle is never aimed at you. Now you can put the ammunition back in
the gun and continue hunting.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 35
.Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting
Fundamentals of
Shotgun Shooting
Learning to shoot is like mastering any other skill. No first-day
skier would venture to the top of the peak for the first run. Nor
should you, as a first-time shooter, begin by loading up and
blasting away at targets flying in every direction.
Your introduction should start with an understanding of what
must be accomplished in the process of learning and using basic
skills to hit the target. We’ll begin with a discussion of five funda-
mentals of shotgun shooting that must be practiced and adhered
to in exact sequence every time you take a shot. Once you have
mastered the fundamentals, you can begin to apply them to a
variety of shotgunning sports. The five fundamentals are:
1. Position
2. Mount
3. Vision
4. Movement
5. Focus on the Target
Before you start learning these fundamentals, there’s an
important question you must answer about yourself. On which
side should you shoulder your gun? Whether you are right- or
left-handed is not as important as which eye is dominant.
You may not be conscious of it, but you probably have
one eye that determines the direction in which you look. That
is your dominant eye. Since the ability to align your shotgun
with a moving target is essential, you should use your dominant
eye and shoulder your gun on that side. How do you determine
this? There’s an easy test: Extend your hands in front of your


36 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting.
face, placing them together so that only a small opening remains
between them. Now look through this space with both eyes open,
focusing on some distant object.
While maintaining your focus, keep both eyes open and
start moving your hands closer to your face. Continue this
motion until your hands reach your face. At this point, you will
have instinctively lined up the opening in your hands with one
eye. That’s your dominant eye. Test a few times to be sure.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 37
.Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting
Position
When you are in proper position,
• Your stance is aligned with the target-breaking point.
• Your feet are about shoulder width apart, with the toes on
your lead foot turned slightly outward.
• The knee of your lead leg is bent slightly; the back leg
remains straight.
• Approximately 60% of your body weight is on the lead leg,
and 40% on rear leg.
• Your stance should be comfortable and balanced so that it
may be maintained before, during, and after the shot.
Mount
Gun mount refers to the positioning of the shotgun in such a
way as to allow the shooter to respond both mechanically and
visually to a moving target. The stock, or butt, should be posi-
tioned in the pocket of the shoulder on the shooting-hand side.
Bring the stock to your cheek and your trigger hand elbow to
shoulder level. Keep the stock firmly against your cheek dur-
ing the shooting process. The muzzle is placed slightly below
the expected flight path of your target, thus providing you a
A good shooting stance is very similar to
the basic stance of a boxer (left). With slight
adjustment of the hand and arm (middle), the
shotgun can be added for a correct shooting
position (right).


38 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting.
clear view of the target area. Proper gun fit, gun balance, point
of impact (POI), and muzzle jump will all influence the gun
mount.
Vision
The shotgun should be positioned on the side of the body that
is eye dominant. Perform the eye dominance exercise on pages
35-36 to determine your eye dominance. Binocular vision is
preferred when shooting, as keeping both eyes open allows for
better depth perception and field of vision.
Eye muscle strength** will impact shooting accuracy, as
eyes can become fatigued over time. Proper head position
affects balance and vision. The head should be erect and eyes
level with the ground. The cheek should be planted firmly
against the stock of the shotgun.
Primary vision is the central portion of the vision
field. Secondary vision is the area outside of this zone. The
emergence of the target from the trap house or from behind
trees or bushes is best seen by secondary vision. This can be
referred to as the eye-hold area. The last aspect of vision is the
mental image of the proper barrel/target relationship, which is
referred to as sight picture. Sight picture involves both vertical
and horizontal position of the target in relation to the muzzle of
the shotgun.
Keep the comb of the stock firmly in position against your cheek.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 39
.Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting
Movement
The components of gun/body movement include seeing the
target, swinging to the target, leads, trigger pull, and follow-
through. The gun and body must move as a single unit in
a well-coordinated manner toward the target. If this is done
correctly, the gun will be nearly aligned with the target when
the stock comes into position, allowing the shot to be executed
without hesitation.
Seeing the Target. For faster reaction time, the eye-hold point
should be in the location of the emergence point of the target.
Swinging to the Target. Swinging to the target is a process.
Keep both eyes open, and the stock firmly against the cheek.
With the shotgun butt in the pocket of the shoulder, and feet
shoulder width apart, the entire body moves as a unit.
Leads. For the pass-through lead, the shooter points behind the
moving target and swings through it, pulling the trigger as the
bead passes the target. The speed and range of your target will
influence how fast the barrel is swung. In the pull-away lead
the gun is mounted onto the target, moving with it, then pulled
ahead of it and fired. The intercept lead is an instinctive method,
following the leading edge of the target. This method works well
enough in calm conditions at close range. The sustained lead is
maintained ahead of the target, and the shotgun is fired without
stopping the swing. You must make adjustments for the speed
of the target and the distance from you.
Trigger Pull. The shotgun trigger is pulled quickly, unlike the
method used with rifle and pistol triggers. The trigger should be
pulled the instant the sight picture is correct.
Follow-Through. Follow-through means the swing must
continue if the shot pellets are to hit the target. The trigger is
pulled while the shotgun is moving, and the gun must continue
to move after the shot is fired.
Firing Your First Shots
The steps involved in actual shooting are methodical, progressive,
and equally vital. The most effective way to produce the desired
results is to be patient and take it a step at a time. Only after
proper preparation and review can the shotgun and then the
ammunition be added. The rewards will come when you find your
shots hitting the target rather than thin air.
The most
important
fundamental for
accurate shotgun
shooting is seeing
the target. “Focus
on the target!”


Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting.
Know Your Target
In the exercises to come, you will be building up to your first
shots firing on airborne clay targets thrown by a hand or
mechanical trap. First, let’s look at the target.
The breakable clay target is excellent for learning and is
used by millions in target competition. Clay targets are readily
available at most sporting goods stores. Some gun clubs and
ranges may provide them for their participants. They are easily
thrown with a mechanical trap and cost very little.
Learn everything you can about the target. Handle it and
see how easily it breaks. Observe how its design facilitates flight
much like a plastic flying disc. Watch several in flight. On the
range, you will notify the trap operator that you want a target
thrown with the command “Pull.” Notice how the target emerges
from the trap when it is ejected. Get the feel for how fast and
where the target flies.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 41
.Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting
Start With a Straightaway Target
Accomplished shooters fire from many
different positions and with targets
coming or going from many different
directions, angles, speeds, and
distances. At the start, you should
practice on targets flying in only
one direction.
The trap is set so that
it will throw the target fairly
straightaway in front of you.
Initially, each target should follow
virtually the same flight path and
travel at a relatively slow speed. The
background against which the target
will be thrown should be clear—an
open sky with a low horizon line and no
obstructions is ideal. All of this enhances
your ability to concentrate and focus on the
target—and hit it.
Follow-through shooters give more lead than they think. The gun barrel (A) shows
where a shooter thinks he or she shoots on a crossing target. The barrel (B) is where
the shot really happens if a good follow-through is used.
AB
Clay target


42 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting.
Learn to Point
Before you actually start working with your shotgun, it is a good
idea to run through the fundamentals with a target, using your
index finger as a substitute for the shotgun itself. This exercise
will teach you to point toward the flying target without having
to concentrate on the body movements required to position the
shotgun. This will enhance your ability to concentrate on the
target at all times.
Assume the proper stance, but with your index finger pointed
at a 45-degree angle to the ground. Line up your stance with the
expected target-breaking area. If your right eye is dominant, point
with the left hand. If your left eye is dominant, point with the right
hand. By doing this, when the time comes to add the shotgun,
your shooting position will be correct. Now focus your eyes on the
area where your target will first appear and call “Pull.”
As soon as you see your target, immediately move your finger
to the target and keep your finger aligned with it until it hits the
ground. Practice this motion several times. Look at the target all
the time, not the finger you are pointing with. This is an important
concept in shotgun shooting—shotguns are pointed, not aimed.
The difference is that your eyes must always remain focused on
the target, never on the shotgun barrel or beads.
When you begin to be familiar with this pointing exercise,
add a sound effect. When the target is released, again move
your finger to it smoothly. At the instant your finger seems to
touch the target, simulate pulling the trigger by saying “Bang!”
Remember to follow through. This may sound a bit silly, but it
serves a distinct purpose. In shotgun shooting at a straightaway


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 43
.Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting
target, it is imperative to be able to time your shot so that you
pull the trigger as soon as the muzzle seems to touch the target.
By saying “Bang,” you are learning to recognize and develop
a mental picture of actions in shooting that should eventually
become instinctive.
Practice Pointing With Your Shotgun
Now you can start using the gun itself. Remember all the basic
safety rules. Keep the muzzle pointed in a safe direction and keep
your finger off the trigger until you are ready to shoot. Check to
make sure both the chamber and the magazine are unloaded by
opening the action and making sure no shells are in the gun.
Your first step with the shotgun in your hands should be
to review the first three shooting fundamentals. Get into the
proper shooting position. Make sure your stance is balanced and
allows you to easily rotate from right to left and back, covering
the shooting area. Assume the gun ready position. Now practice
bringing the shotgun from the gun ready position into the correct
firing position. Check to be sure you are doing everything
correctly. Take your time, and practice.
Once you have learned to bring the shotgun smoothly into
the correct firing position, it is time to add the target. Practice
calling for and swinging to the target, following it all the way to
the ground. This teaches you to stay with your gun. Be sure to
keep your eyes focused on the target all the time.
Dry-firing
After working on the first three fundamentals, you can add
dry-firing, or pulling the trigger, with the action closed but
unloaded. After checking the chamber and magazine, close the
action, place the safety in the “off” position, and assume your
stance and gun ready position. Now call “Pull,” this time pulling
the trigger the instant your muzzle sight touches the target.
Now is the time to really work on follow-through. Doing
everything exactly the same as when you pulled the trigger,
practice staying with the gun for a second or two after firing.
Remember to keep the stock firmly in place against your cheek.


44 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting.
Open the action after each shot, just as if you were really
ejecting a spent shell.
Shooting Live Ammunition
When you have dry-fired a number of times, it is time to start
shooting with live ammunition. First, return your gun to the rack
and review the firearm handling and shooting rules. Make sure
you know them and follow them! Put on your eye and hearing
protection. Pick up your shotgun and move to the firing station.
From here on it is a good idea to learn to do each step by the
numbers. Learning to do the steps the same way every time is the
key to consistent success in shooting. Follow these seven steps:
Step 1—Once at the station, your NRA instructor will
demonstrate by loading your first shell into the shotgun. The
instructor will continue to load all the shells during the session.
Step 2—Establish your stance in relation to the target area.
Step 3—Establish gun ready position with the muzzle slightly
below the target’s flight path. Place your finger lightly on
the trigger.
Step 4—Focus on the target area where the target will appear.
Step 5—Call “Pull” for the target.
Step 6—Upon seeing the target, swing to target, pull the trig-
ger, and follow through.
Step 7—Open the action and unload the shotgun immediately
after firing. The action on a semiautomatic shotgun should
automatically remain open after the last shot is fired.
How did you do? If you followed the fundamentals, you
should have broken a target. If your untouched target dropped
to the ground, do not be too hard on yourself. This is just
the first shot of many to come. As in all sports requiring skill
and coordination, successful shotgun shooting means ongoing
practice. So try again! As you refine your ability to concentrate
on the target, you will begin to see targets breaking one
after another.
Practice with straightaway targets until you hit them fairly
consistently. Then you can move on to more difficult targets by
gradually changing their angles of flight.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 45
.Fundamentals of Shotgun Shooting
Scoring
Your cartridge-type shotgun shooting will be done using a
gun in the range of 12 gauge, 16 gauge, 20 gauge, 28 gauge,
or .410 bore. You should use a gun well-fitted and light enough
to permit accurate pointing when shooting.
You will be shooting at clay targets thrown by a hand trap,
mechanical trap, or on any trap or skeet field. A hand trap
operator should be at least 5 feet to the right and 3 feet to the
rear of the shooter. If throwing left-handed with a hand trap,
the operator should be at least 5 feet to the left and 3 feet to
the rear of the shooter.
You will shoot in rounds of 25. Rounds need not be shot
consecutively or on the same day. (The term round refers to a
single series of 25 shots.)
To attain the merit badge requirement with a cartridge-type
shotgun, you must hit at least 24 out of 50 targets (48 percent
of two 25-target rounds). To meet the requirement with the
muzzleloading shotgun, you must hit at least 5 out of 15 targets.
A sample scorecard


46 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Choosing a Shotgun.
Choosing a Shotgun
Getting a shotgun of your own can be something you will
remember all of your life. But picking the right one can be
tough. Usually, the larger the bore, the heavier the shotgun will
be. This makes the .410 shotgun the lightest and the 10-gauge
shotgun the heaviest. You certainly will want a shotgun that
you are capable of handling and that will do the job for which
it is intended. A 12-gauge will give an effective shot density for
a beginner and a gas-operated system (autoloader) will reduce
recoil. A 20-gauge shotgun of this type, with a properly sized
youth stock (shortened length of pull, can be managed by even
the smallest Scouts.
Study available guns in your area. You might start at your
local library. A visit to a sporting goods or gun specialty store
is a must. Here, you can handle the various guns and test their
feel. Find a truly interested salesperson to explain the features
of the models you are studying. Be specific about your interests,
plans for use, and budget. Take your time. Do not buy on
impulse or a slick sales pitch.
Select a Shotgun That Fits
The main part of a shotgun’s fit is in the stock. Most manufac-
turers sell shotguns with standard stock dimensions designed to
fit the average-size adult. Many also produce youth models with
smaller or adjustable dimensions suitable to a smaller physique.
There are two important fit considerations—the length from
the trigger to the butt, and height of the comb of the stock. For
young people or adults with short arms or stature, standard-
length stocks usually are too long.
Buying quality
brands generally
will ensure the
availability of
future repairs
and parts. It will
help bring a
good return on
your investment.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 47
.Choosing a Shotgun
You should be able to comfortably mount a properly fitted
gun in the same place every time. If you find that you are having
to make adjustments, the gun does not fit properly. You should
try to buy a gun that fits. If you cannot, you may need to have
your gun fitted by a gunsmith. Note that as you grow and your
shooting skill improves, you may need to have your gun refitted.
When you pull the gun into the shooting position, your cheek
should sit tightly against the comb, the barrel should be directly
in front of your dominant shooting eye, and there should be
approximately 1 1
⁄2 to 3 inches between the end of your nose and
the thumb of the grip hand that is wrapped atop the butt grip.
Some manufacturers make shotguns designed for use
from only the right or the left shoulder. Make sure the
gun is proper for you.
If the shotgun fits, this is the view you should get when looking down the barrel.


48 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Choosing a Shotgun.
Before You Buy
Check out these precautions before making your choice to help
you prevent a hasty—and expensive—decision.
Selecting a
Shotgun?
Answering questions like
these will help you deter-
mine the type of shotgun and
ammunition you will need.
• How do you plan to use this
shotgun? Will it be used
mainly for shooting at clay
targets, or will you also
want to hunt in the field?
What is the best gauge for
your use?
• Is ammunition readily avail-
able? How much will it cost
for the amount of shooting
you want to do?
• How much can you spend
for a shotgun?
• Have you done your homework? Have you studied manufacturers’
catalogs? Have you looked at and handled different makes available?
• Is the shotgun simple to operate and easy to clean?
• Does the gun fit you?
• Have you read the warranty or guarantees?
• Is the shotgun produced by a known manufacturer?
• Does the shotgun brand have a good record for dependability?
• Are you purchasing from a reputable dealer who likely will still be in
business when you need help?
• What is the marketability if you decide to sell your shotgun? Could you
get back most of your investment if you sell?
• Have you taken your time in making your choice?


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 49
.Choosing a Shotgun
Buying a Used Shotgun
If you are shopping for a used gun, consider these points:
• Locate the previous owner, if possible, and find out why the
shotgun was traded or sold.
• A poor outward appearance of a shotgun generally indicates
abuse or excessive wear.
• Make certain a refinish job has not disguised past abuse
of the shotgun.
• Check screw slots to see that they have not been damaged
during disassembly.
• Check the trigger for consistent, safe pull and smooth func-
tion. Check the safety to be sure it functions properly.
• Note that shotguns in an original, unaltered condition tend to
be of more value.
• Get advice from a gun expert regarding this shotgun’s
market value.
• Check the wood in the stock for type, quality, and
hairline cracks.
• Shoot the shotgun, if possible, before buying.
• Be certain the shotgun is legally owned by the seller.
• You usually get what you pay for! Beware of deals that are
too good to be true—they usually are.
Remember, chances are good that you will keep your
shotgun for life.


TRAP HOUSE
STATIONS
16 YDS
22%
27 YDS
22%
50 YDS


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 51
.Clay Target Sports
Clay Target Sports
Many shotgunners enjoy shooting flying clay targets. Some
may shoot only at those thrown from a portable or hand trap
to sharpen their wing shooting skills for the hunting season.
Others enjoy shooting one or more of the clay target sports,
either for occasional recreation or as a serious competitor.
The three major clay target sports are trap, skeet, and sporting
clays. At least one of these is usually available within a short
driving distance from most Scouts’ homes in the United States.
Trapshooting
Trapshooting using live birds released from special “traps”
began in Europe around 1790 and in the United States about
1831. Targets began to replace live birds in the mid-1800s.


52 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Clay Target Sports.
The modern trapshooting field consists of five shooting
stations located 16 to 27 yards behind a single trap house from
which the 45
⁄16-inch diameter clay targets are thrown. The
targets are thrown going away from the shooter within an area
22 degrees left or right of the trap house center. The shooter
knows the elevation of the target’s flight, but the horizontal
direction constantly varies and is not known until the target
emerges from the trap house when the shooter calls “Pull.”
Trapshooters usually use 12 gauge shotguns with modified,
improved modified, or full choke barrels and No. 71
⁄2 or
No. 8 shot.
A trapshooting squad usually consists of five shooters, each
occupying one of the five stations. Each shooter loads and fires
one shot in turn until all have fired five shots, then they rotate
to the next station. This process continues until all five shooters
have fired five shots from each of the five stations for a total of
25 shots each. The 25 shots by each member of the squad is
known as a round of trap. The object is to break all 25 targets,
or as many as possible, in the round.
Formal competition trapshooting events are held throughout
the United States under the direction of the Amateur Trapshooting
Association. The largest of these is the Grand American Trap Shoot
held each August. It is the largest shooter participation event in
the world. ATA shooters are assigned a classification based on
their performance so that each shooter competes against those of
their own general skill level.
The most popular
trapshooting sport
is the 16-yard
singles event, in
which all shooters
shoot one target
at a time from
the 16-yard line
stations. Another
variation on the
event, doubles
trap, also is
popular. Doubles
trap is shot
from the 16-yard
line and involves
two targets
being released
simultaneously.
Trapshooting (with an instructor’s help)


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 53
.Clay Target Sports
Olympic Competition
Olympic trapshooting uses an international form of the sport in
which each of the five shooting stations has three associated traps.
The targets fly faster than in American trap, and both the vertical
and horizontal flight angles vary from shot to shot. Shooters may
fire two shots at each target in international trapshooting. USA
Shooting is the governing body for the United States’ participation
in Olympic trapshooting.
Skeet
The sport of skeet shooting originated in the United States about
1920 as a way for hunters to simulate shots encountered in game
bird hunting. It uses the same clay target used in trapshooting.
Skeet is shot on a semicircular skeet field consisting of two
trap houses and eight shooting stations. The trap house on the
left is known as the high house. Targets emerge from the high
house 10 feet above ground level. The low house is located on
the right side of the field. Low house targets emerge 31
⁄2 feet
above ground level. Targets from either house are thrown to
pass 15 feet above ground level over the crossing stake located
at the center of the semicircular field.


54 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Clay Target Sports.
Seven of the eight shooting stations are distributed evenly
around the outer perimeter of the skeet field with station one at
the high house and station seven at the low house. Each of these
seven stations is 21 yards from the crossing stake. Station eight is
located halfway along a line between the two trap houses.
A round of skeet consists of 25 targets. The typical skeet
squad of five shooters begins at station one and progresses
through station eight with each shooter, in turn, completing all
of the shots required at each station before moving to the next
station. A single target from the high house is the first shot at
each station and is thrown when the shooter calls “Pull.” That
is followed by a single target from the low house when the
shooter again calls “Pull.” Doubles skeet is shot from stations
one, two, six, and seven. In shooting doubles, the shooter loads
two shotshells and calls “Pull,” and the two targets are thrown
simultaneously, one from each trap house. The shooter must
shoot the “going away” target first and the “incoming” target
second. Doubles are shot immediately following the two single
targets at the four stations where they are required. At station
eight the entire squad takes their turn at the high house target
only. Then they each shoot the low house target.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 55
.Clay Target Sports
If you’ve been counting, you have noticed that this accounts
for only 24 shots. In skeet, the remaining shot is either a repeat
of the shooter’s first missed target or, if all 24 targets have been
broken, a repeat of the last shot at station eight low house.
Skeet may be shot with any gauge shotgun, 12 gauge or
smaller, capable of firing two shots in quick succession. Since
it is a close-range sport, guns with skeet or improved cylinder
chokes using No. 8 or No. 9 shot are preferred.
Formal competitive skeet shooting events are held through-
out the United States under the direction of the National Skeet
Shooting Association. Most formal competitions have separate
events for the 12 gauge, 20 gauge, 28 gauge, and .410 bore
shotguns. Shooters are assigned classifications based on past
performance so that they may compete with those of similar
ability. The largest tournament is the World Skeet Shooting
Championships held each October in San Antonio, Texas.
International skeet is shot in many other countries and
as an Olympic sport. While it uses the same field layout as
American skeet, the targets are thrown faster and their release
is randomly delayed up to three seconds after the shooter
calls “Pull.” Further, the shooter must hold the shotgun butt
at hip level until the target emerges. Moving the shotgun before
the target is released is scored as a lost target. To add even
more challenge, some of the easier targets in American skeet
are eliminated and doubles as well as singles are required on
stations three, four, and five. USA Shooting is the governing
body for the United States’ participation in Olympic skeet.
The shooting sports are able to accommodate the
highest levels of physical disability of any of the skill
sports. Modern adaptive equipment and positioning
techniques allow people with a variety of disabilities to
have a safe and enjoyable experience in many types of
shooting activities.


56 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Clay Target Sports.
Sporting Clays
Sporting clays originated in France in the 1920s. It was introduced
in the United States in the 1960s and has been growing rapidly in
popularity since 1990.
Sporting clays courses offer a wide variety of shots that
simulate those found in hunting upland birds, waterfowl, and
rabbits. Each sporting clays course is unique and presents a mix
of close, midrange, and distant shots traveling at various speeds
from several traps. In addition to the standard clay target used
in skeet and trap, sporting clays shooters are also challenged
with the 90-millimeter mini target, the 60-millimeter mini target,
the nearly flat (1
⁄4 inch thick) battue target that may show only
its narrow edge until it turns in flight, and the rabbit target, a
tough version of the standard target that bounces along the
ground like its namesake.
Both single-target shots and doubles are encountered in
sporting clays. Doubles may be thrown simultaneously from
two traps, as following pairs released in quick succession (but
not simultaneously) from one or two traps, or as report pairs
where the second target is thrown as soon as the first target
is fired upon.
Shooters on a sporting clays squad progress from station to
station throughout the course. At each station the squad is first
shown the flight of the targets they are about to shoot. Each
station may have safety barriers on either side of the shooter to
prevent unsafe shooting to the left or right. Sporting clays courses
often are built in wooded areas that present the shooter with
very limited spaces in which to shoot the target. A sporting clays
event usually consists of 50 or 100 targets. Perfect scores are rare!
Because of the variety of distances at which targets must
be shot, sporting clays shooters usually use shotguns with
changeable or adjustable chokes. The over-and-under shotgun
is often preferred since it gives the shooter the opportunity
to quickly select two different chokes while shooting. Most
sporting clays participants use a 12 gauge shotgun, although
special events are frequently held for smaller gauges. Shot
sizes used range from No. 71
⁄2 to No. 9, depending on the type
and distance of the target to be shot.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 57
.Clay Target Sports
Formal sporting clays competitions in the United States
are held under the direction of the National Sporting Clays
Association. Classifications are assigned to the shooters based
on their past performance so that each competes against those
of like ability.
Common clay targets, from left: standard trap and skeet target, midi target, mini
target, battue target, rabbit target


58 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Clay Target Sports.
Shooting Clubs
One of the best ways to improve your shooting skills is to join
a local shooting club and its junior shooting program. Juniors in
these clubs shoot the NRA Qualification Program and participate
in local, state, and national competitions. A local club is a great
way to meet new shooters with the same interests and to travel
to new places to test your shooting skills.
Special Activities
NRA Youth Hunter Education Challenge (YHEC) programs
are sanctioned each year in the United States and Canada by
the hunter safety coordinator in each state or province. The
top finishers from these events are eligible to participate in the
North American YHEC, which is held each summer. Young
hunters also have the opportunity to earn awards for successful
hunts in the Young Hunter Awards Program.
Camp programs offer one way to introduce young people
to shooting. Not only do Scouting America local councils have
shooting in many of their summer camp programs, but many
private summer camps also have shooting programs.
School programs are designed to educate high school
students about shooting sports and to promote activities among
school groups. Physical education classes, scholastic clubs,
and competitive teams may be involved in any of the various
shooting disciplines.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 59
.Clay Target Sports
Collegiate Clay Target Shooting
More than 50 colleges and universities have some form of shot-
gun shooting program. A few of these schools offer shooting
scholarships. The Association of College Unions International,
with assistance from the National Rifle Association, conducts
the annual Intercollegiate Clay Target Championships. Every
classified collegiate shotgunner in good standing is eligible to
compete, and participation is on the rise.





SHOTGUN SHOOTING 61
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
Muzzleloading Shotguns
Until the introduction of cartridge firearms in the 1800s, all
firearms were muzzleloaders. The firearm originated more
than 500 years ago. Its inventors found that when a highly
combustible material was confined and then lighted, the
resulting burning or explosion created enough energy to
send a projectile over long distances.
The earliest firearms were incredibly crude and unpredictable
by today’s standards. Since their inception, firearms have consisted
of three basic parts: the lock (or firing mechanism known today as
the action), the stock (the handle by which the gun is held), and
the barrel (the hollow tube through which the projectile travels on
its way to the target).
Parts of the flintlock action
JAW
COCK
JAW SCREW
FLINT VENT
FRIZZEN
FLASH PAN
FRIZZEN
SPRING


62 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
The term muzzleloader comes from the fact that all of
these guns were loaded through the muzzle. First came the
matchlock, a gun fired by a lighted wick that ignited the powder.
This was followed by the wheel lock. This gun’s powder was
ignited by a spark that came from a wheel spinning against
flint. Then came the flintlock and the percussion lock—the two
that are considered in this merit badge pamphlet.
The flintlock was developed in the 1600s. A piece of flint
was secured between the jaws of the cock, or hammer. The
priming powder was contained in a pan, covered by a hinged
lid called the pan cover or frizzen. When the trigger was pulled,
the flint struck the frizzen. As the flint scraped the frizzen face,
sparks flew into the priming charge in the pan.
The final advance in the history of the muzzleloader took
place in the early 1800s. During this era, a compound called
fulminate of mercury began to replace powder as the priming
agent. This compound was housed in a small metal container
known as a percussion cap. When the cap was struck by the
hammer of the gun, it ignited, setting off the powder charge.
Percussion caps were the forerunner of the modern cartridge.
They represented the first use of a prepackaged priming agent
in the firing mechanism.
The matchlock and wheel lock muzzleloaders are found
today only in museums or in the hands of collectors.
The flintlock and the percussion lock are alive and well.
The popularity of these two guns is great enough for
manufacturers to make replicas that can be found in
sporting goods stores.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 63
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
Parts of the Muzzleloading Shotgun
In today’s language, the expression “lock, stock, and barrel”
means the job is finished. Actually, this old expression describes
the parts of a muzzleloader.
The Lock
This is the portion of the gun used to ignite the main charge in
the barrel. The lock will differ depending on whether it is for
flintlock or percussion lock. In the flintlock, certain steps must
be taken to ensure that the flint can function properly. The
jaws of the hammer on these firearms generally uses a bed of
leather that holds the flint firmly. In positioning the flint, you
must not allow the front edge to touch the closed frizzen when
the hammer is in the half-cock position. The position you select
for inserting the flint will depend on what works best with your
gun. The bevel (slant) of the flint may be either up or down—
whichever is more successful.
STOCK
LOCK
BARREL


64 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
The action of pulling the trigger trips the lock. In this process,
the hammer comes down briskly, striking the face of the frizzen
or percussion cap and setting off the ignition necessary to fire the
main powder charge. The percussion gun has a small cap that
can be fitted over the nipple. When the hammer strikes the cap,
it detonates, sending the ignition down to the main powder
charge. It is important that you understand the workings of the
mechanism for either gun, since this knowledge will be helpful
in caring for and cleaning your gun.
The Stock
This is the part by which the gun is held. It is particularly
important in muzzleloading guns. Shotguns fire with some
recoil, or kick. Thus the butt must be designed so that it fits
snugly against your shoulder to absorb these forces. The end
of the stock that makes contact with your shoulder is called
the butt. The top portion of the butt is called the heel, and
the bottom portion the toe.
Parts of the percussion lock
HAMMER
NIPPLE
SNAIL
LOCK PLATE


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 65
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
Aiming the shotgun also brings the stock into play. Since the
sighting features on a shotgun are quite basic, bringing the gun
into position where the eye has a clear view of the target and its
projected path is essential. In such a position the shooter’s cheek
touches the stock in a top area known as the comb. The “fit”
of a shotgun stock to a particular shooter is an essential part of
accurate shooting.
The stock must be designed to allow the shooter to grip the
entire gun firmly. The portion of the stock grasped by the hand
in order to pull the trigger is known, appropriately, as the grip.
Yet another purpose of the stock is to provide a firm support for
the barrel. The part of the stock extending under the barrel is
known as the fore-end.
The Barrel
Shotgun barrels have a smooth bore. The diameter of shotgun
bores commonly varies from 1
⁄2 inch to more than 3
⁄4 inch. The
term used to describe the bore of a shotgun is called the gauge.
The most common bore sizes of muzzleloading shotguns are
10, 12, 16, 20, and 28 gauge.
Unlike breech-loading shotguns, most muzzleloading
shotguns have little or no choke. Choke is the term used to
describe the narrowing of the barrel at the last few inches
nearest the muzzle. The more the barrel is choked, the less
the pattern spreads.
Choke is unusual in muzzleloading shotguns because the
smaller choked portion makes it difficult to load a bore-size wad
through the muzzle. As a result, muzzleloading shot patterns
tend to be wider than those of most breech-loading guns.
Because muzzleloaders spread shot wider than other
shotguns, they generally are used more for hunting or shoot-
ing moving targets. The sighting apparatus tends to be simple.
Muzzleloading shotguns usually have a small bead attached to
the top of the barrel at the muzzle end. The shooter’s eye then
serves as the rear sight, so proper positioning of the stock while
shooting is vital.
A shotgun
is pointed,
not aimed.


66 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
Using Black Powder
True black powder is essentially the same substance that has
been used as ammunition in muzzleloaders for centuries. It’s
a mixture of saltpeter (potassium nitrate), charcoal, and sulfur
that, when burned, emits a dense cloud of white smoke. It was
developed as a propellant in rock throwing around a.d. 1200
and has remained essentially unchanged.
Only commercially manufactured black powder substitute
offered for sale by a reputable firm should be used in muzzle-
loading rifles. Black powder substitutes produce nearly identical
pressure, bullet velocity, smoke, and noise.
Black powder usable in muzzleloading firearms can be found
in four granulations. The grain size of the powder will determine
its rate of burning. The finer the grain, the faster the powder will
burn and, therefore, the greater the pressure it will develop. Under
containment this pressure increases greatly. The very finest black
powder should never be used as the main charge.
The four basic granulations are:
GOEX Clear Shot Triple-7 Pyrodex
Triple-7
Pellets
Pyrodex
Pellets
Swiss Black Powder Schuetzen Black Powder
GOEX Black Powder


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 67
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
• Fg Course-grain powder, which may be used in shotguns
of 10 gauge and larger.
• FFg Medium-grain powder used in shotguns of 10 to
20 gauge.
• FFFg Fine-grained powder used in shotguns smaller than
20 gauge.
• FFFFg This extra-fine-grain powder should be used only as
a priming agent (never as the main powder charge).
Black powder substitute is available from a number of sources.
Its chemical makeup is different from that of black powder, but
it will produce about the same pressure, shot velocity, smoke,
and noise as black powder. A substitute is not recommended
for use with flintlocks, and loading procedures for substitutes
may vary. Your gun dealer or manufacturer should be able to
provide details.
Whether you are using black powder or a substitute,
you must exercise proper safety. Both are
explosives, and as such are subject to rapid
and unexpected ignition unless handled
with utmost caution. Check local ordinances
pertaining to the storage of explosives of
this nature. Laws vary, and you have full
responsibility to respect and obey whatever
conditions are applicable in your community. When using black
powder or a substitute:
• Always store in a safe container. Black powder usually comes in
a 1-pound metal can, which protects the powder against sparks
and heat. Make sure the can is firmly sealed when not in use.
Never store black powder in a glass or plastic container.
• Always handle powder in an open, well-ventilated area. In
the process of pouring powder in the powder horn or flask
you use for transporting in the field, you can accumulate fine
powder dust that can easily ignite if put in contact with a
spark, flame, or heat.
• Never let anyone smoke around you when handling powder.
• Always use powder measures when placing powder in your
gun. Never pour powder directly from the can, horn, or flask,
as there could be a spark remaining in the barrel from a pre-
vious shot. This could ignite your entire powder supply.
• Always store powder separately from percussion caps.
Scouting America
will use only
commercially
manufactured
black powder
substitute offered
for sale by a
reputable firm.


68 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
Loading Your Muzzleloading Shotgun
Loading may seem complicated and time-consuming, but
remember that you are repeating a generations-old process.
With repeated practice, you will get the hang of it.
Loading requires several accessories:
• Powder horn or flask. This is the receptacle for carrying
powder in the field.
• Powder measure. This small container is used to determine
the proper amount of powder for each shot and to pour it
into the muzzle of the shotgun.
• Wads. These fiber spacers are used to form a seal between
the powder and shot in the barrel and to retain the load posi-
tion in the barrel.
• Wad lubricant. This substance is used to lubricate the wads,
therefore assuring more effective sealing and some softening
of residues that naturally accumulate in the barrel when the
gun is fired.
• Wad puller. This instrument is used to remove wads from
the barrel in cases where some malfunction prevents the shot
from being fired.
• Ramrod with cleaning jag. A standard feature on most
muzzleloading firearms, the ramrod is used to push the
charge into the barrel. When used with a cleaning jag, it is
useful in cleaning the inside of the barrel.
• Cleaning patches. Pieces of soft fabric are used to wipe the
bore and other hard-to-reach portions of the gun.
• Vent pick. This is a thin wire used to clean the flash channel.
• Nipple wrench. This small wrench is used to remove the
nipple of muzzleloading percussion shotguns.
• Shotgun mop. This is a handy tool for cleaning and
lubricating the bore.
• Shooting box or hunting pouch. This is a container for
holding all of these items, in addition to your shot, priming
powder container (if using a flintlock), and other gear you
might find useful.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 69
Items needed for shooting muzzleloading shotguns, identified by number: (1) wad
lubricant, (2) wad puller, (3) cleaning patches, (4) vent pick, (5) nipple wrench,
(6) shotgun mop, (7) hunting pouch or possible bag, (8) ear protection, (9) shooting
glasses, (10) powder flask, (11) shot flask, (12) shot pouch, (13) shot measure, (14)
wad filler, (15) over powder wad, (16) wads (over shot), (17) powder horn, (18)
percussion caps, (19) powder measure, (20) cleaning rod
Before you begin to absorb the loading directions, a few cautions:
• Always wear eye protection when loading or firing
your gun.
• Always wear hearing protection when any firing is done.
• Always follow the loading procedures in the exact order
you read them here!
9
7
10
1
5
12
17
4
11
13
3
14
15 16
18
2
6
20
6
19
8


70 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
Position the Shotgun for Loading
If you are loading a double-barrel shotgun, you
must be very cautious at the beginning. In the
case of a percussion gun, if one barrel is still
loaded, make sure its nipple is uncapped and
the hammer is at half-cock position. If it’s a
flintlock, be sure the priming pan is empty, the
frizzen open, and the hammer down. Also be
careful that you load the empty barrel! It’s easy
to make a mistake and double the load in one
barrel if you are not paying close attention.
Once you’ve taken these precautions,
stand the gun on the ground with the firearm
resting between your legs and the muzzle
pointed upward and away from you. Never
work directly over the muzzle of a shotgun,
even when you’re sure the gun is unloaded.
Check Bore for Load
It’s easy to check the bore for a load. When you
are certain the gun is empty, take the ramrod
from the stock and insert it as far as it will go
into the barrel or use a bench rod. A bench rod
is a ramrod made of brass, stainless steel, or
other unbreakable material, with a large handle.
Using a bench rod when target shooting is more
comfortable for the shooter, and it is less likely
to break than a wooden rod. Mark a spot on
the ramrod flush with the muzzle. Whenever
you want to check whether there’s a load in the
shotgun, put the ramrod down the barrel. If the
mark you made when the gun was empty is at
muzzle, the barrel is empty.
Never try to clear a loaded or obstructed
barrel by yourself. Enlist the aid of an experienced
shooter, or, better still, a qualified gunsmith. Never
try to free the gun of an old load by firing. You
don’t know how long the load has been sitting
there, what it consists of, or what will happen
when you try to fire.
Place the shotgun between the
legs for loading. This is a common
and stable position.
Insert the ramrod to check the bore for a
charge. The bottom part of the ramrod should
come to the nipple.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 71
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
Wipe and Clean the Bore
Wipe and clean the bore. Use your ramrod to run a
dry shotgun mop or cleaning patch up and down the
bore. This will remove any excess oil from the bore
that might interfere with ignition. On a flintlock, you
can run a vent pick through the flash hole. Also, clean
around the pan and frizzen with a brush or cloth to
remove oil, dirt, and lint.
With a percussion shotgun, you will want to clear
the flash channel by firing two or three percussion
caps on the nipple. To do this, step up to the firing line.
Place a percussion cap on the nipple. Point the shotgun
downrange and fire the first cap to ensure the barrel
is empty. Place a second percussion cap on the nipple
and point the shotgun at a leaf on the ground or blade
of grass in front of the firing line. Fire the cap and look
to see if the leaf or grass moves, and repeat if neces-
sary. If the leaf or grass moves upon firing, you are
assured the flash channel is open.
Measure the Powder Charge
Pour powder from your horn or flask and fill the powder measure
to the correct level. A good starting measurement for 12 gauge is
the 1-ounce measurement on the dipper, filled with powder. This
is approximately 65 grains. However, always follow the powder
charge recommendations that are provided by the manufacturer.
Always use a powder measure in the
loading process. Never load a gun
directly from the powder flask.
Use a cloth patch
to remove any dirt
and residue from
the bore.


72 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
Charge the Barrel With Powder
Being careful to keep the muzzle pointed away from
you, pour the powder from your powder measure
down the barrel. Tap the side of the barrel a few
times with the heel of your hand to shake the
powder clinging to the sides of the bore. If using
a double-barrel shotgun, remember to keep track
of which barrel you load first to prevent double
loading the same barrel. One way to do this is to
leave the ramrod in the barrel you are not loading
while you are loading the other barrel.
Load the Wad Column
The next step involves inserting and securing the
first two of three wads you will use in preparing the
charge. First place an “over powder card wad” (with
a thickness of about .125 inch) over the muzzle. Use
of a short starter may help get the over powder wad
started in a choked shotgun. Push your ramrod all
the way down the barrel so that the wad reaches
the powder. The large button at the end of the
ramrod will straighten the wad as it’s rammed into
the barrel. When you’ve rammed far enough to
reach the powder charge, apply and maintain a
little pressure to compress the wad and the powder
together. Holding the wad against the powder for a
moment will minimize the chances of air pressure
building up between the wad and the powder and
creating a gap between the two. If you feel air pres-
sure force the wad and ramrod up, push down again
until the air trapped behind the wad bleeds out.
Once the wad is firmly seated, follow it with a
thick (1
⁄4 inch or more) fiber wad. This second wad
should be dampened—but not saturated—with a
good black powder lubricant before insertion. Again,
be sure that this second wad is seated against
the first and that both are tight against the
powder charge.
Pour the premeasured charge
directly from the powder
measure.
Seat the wad as shown.
Remember, never pour powder directly from
the powder can, powder horn, or flask.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 73
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
Load the Shot
Before inserting the shot, determine what shot is
to be used. For trap shooting, 8 or 9, and for skeet
shooting, No. 8 to 9 shot are acceptable sizes.
Hunting will require a size ranging from No. 2 to
No. 8, depending on the game you’ll be hunting.
The charge can be measured by using a shot dipper
or a flask with a built-in measure. Once the proper
charge has been measured out, pour it down the
bore. A good rule of thumb for a starting load of
shot is equal volumes of shot and powder. So, if the
dipper is set at the 1-ounce measurement, you can
use a 1-ounce shot. If the gun recoils uncomfortably,
you can reduce the shot and powder load.
Load the Over-Shot Wad
Finally, take a thin wad and insert it down the barrel
as before. Make sure the wad is firmly seated against
the shot. Be careful not to apply excessive force as
this will deform the soft shot and create an erratic
shot pattern when the gun is fired.
After the final wad is firmly seated, again mark
the ramrod flush with the muzzle. This will give you
a reference to use in future loading so that you will
know that the charge and wads are seated correctly
each time you load. Note that you have two marks on your
ramrod—one to show the depth of the rod when the barrel is
empty, and the second to show the depth when loaded.
Once your shotgun is loaded,
it’s a good idea to mark the
ramrod for future reference.
Using a shot measure expedites the loading process.


74 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
Capping or Priming
The final step before firing is applying the
percussion cap, in the case of a percussion
gun, and bringing the hammer to full cock.
In the case of a flintlock, fill the priming
pan one-half to three-quarters full of fine-
grain black powder (such as 4f). Close
the frizzen and bring the hammer to full
cock. You are now ready to shoot. This
procedure must be performed away from
the loading bench at the firing line.
Failure to Fire
You pull the trigger, and nothing
happens. The main charge doesn’t
fire—a misfire. Don’t give up. There are
a few relatively easy troubleshooting
steps you can run through quickly that
could solve your problem.
The first thing to remember when
you have a misfire is to keep the gun at
your shoulder for a couple of minutes,
pointed safely downrange. On rare
occasions, muzzleloading shotguns can
have a hangfire—a delay between the
time the trigger is pulled and the time
the gun goes off, caused by a slow-to-
ignite powder charge.
After waiting that couple of minutes, unshoulder your gun
and run a pipe cleaner or fine wire through the nipple or flash
hole (on a flintlock) to be sure the channel is open. Recap, or
in the case of a flintlock reprime, and try again.
If the gun still will not fire, the problem could be that no
powder rests behind the shot. You may have forgotten it during
the loading sequence. If you’re using a percussion gun, remove
the nipple with your nipple wrench. On a flintlock, you can
sometimes work sufficient powder behind the charge through
the firehole. Cap or prime and try to fire again.
The final step before firing is capping
the nipple.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 75
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
Still no luck? After a reasonable number of corrective
efforts, your best course of action is to use a carbon dioxide dis-
charger to expel the load. The other option is to pull the charge.
For this you’ll need a strong, sturdy tool. Your standard ramrod
may be too delicate or too short to do the job easily. You’ll need
a stronger, more durable tool, called the bench rod. It’s best if
this rod has a handle to provide additional leverage. The bench
rod also can be useful in cleaning and loading.
After making sure that your gun is uncapped or unprimed,
screw a wad puller onto the end of your bench
rod. This tool is designed to screw into the
wad and give a turning motion. Insert your
rod down the bore and gently screw the wad
puller into the top over-shot wad. Bring out
the rod and dispose of the wad. Now pour
out the shot and retrieve the two remaining
wads with the wad puller, one wad at a time.
Pour out any powder in the barrel. Thoroughly
clean the barrel and flash channel, or nipple,
before reloading.
With a flintlock, failure to fire could be caused by a
dull piece of flint. Your best bet is to replace the flint with
a new piece. To replace the flint, use a large screwdriver
to open the jaws. Remove the old flint and place a new
one between the jaws and retighten the screw. Be careful
handling flints, as they are extremely sharp! When chang-
ing the flint, the priming pan should be empty and the
frizzen up. If you must replace the flint with a charge in
the barrel, have the instructor blow the load with a CO2
discharger first. Do not return a loaded gun to the loading
area. Ask for assistance.
The remaining failure type is the squib load, when
insufficient power fails to expel all of the wads from the
barrel. It will be necessary to clear the bore before the gun
can be successfully reloaded. Squib loads may be signaled
by an abnormally soft recoil or light report on firing. Carbon dioxide
discharger
The wad puller is also useful in retrieving cleaning
patches that may have fallen off the cleaning jag. Follow
manufacturer’s instructions if using a CO2 discharger.


76 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
Taking Care of Your Gun
A lot of the information in the chapter titled “Shotgun Safety”
applies to the care of your muzzleloader. However, there are a
few differences, and you should note them.
You can protect your shotgun by following a basic rule: After
shooting, never leave your gun overnight without a thorough clean-
ing. Generally, a simple solution of water and any conventional
dishwashing soap along with a bottle of cleaning solvent are
all you will need to clean the gun. Commercial black powder
solvents are effective in removing residue. Lastly, the gun’s
metal parts must be protected with a light layer of oil.
Cleaning the Barrel
Step 1—Flushing. With a hooked-breech design, bring the
hammer to full cock, remove the ramrod and barrel key, and slip
the barrel from the stock. Using a mop or patch on your ramrod,
saturate the bore and fouling with black powder solvent or with
soap and water. Then insert the breech end of the barrel in a
bucket of hot, soapy water. With a cleaning rod and attached
mop of proper size, “pump” the water up through the bore,
moving up and down the full length of the bore several times.
Repeat this procedure using clean, hot water and pumping until
the barrel is clean.
In cases where the breech, barrel, and tang are a single
part, it’s not a good idea to try to separate the barrel. With a
percussion gun, you can siphon soapy water from a bucket
with a flush-out nipple: Remove the standard shooting nipple
from your gun with the nipple wrench and replace it with a
flush-out nipple, which is designed to fit securely in the nipple
channel but has a large hole that can function as the entry
point for water.
A barrel key is a flat iron or steel wedge used to secure
a muzzleloader’s barrel to the stock.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 77
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
Weight the free end of a length of plastic or rubber tubing
(The kind used as the fuel line in model airplanes works well; it
must be of a diameter to fit securely over the flush-out nipple.)
and place it in the water bucket. Position the gun so water
will flow freely throughout the bore. Use the pumping process
described above to scrub and rinse thoroughly. Scrub the standard
shooting nipple in the same solution using an old toothbrush and
a pipe cleaner or similar instrument.
A flush-out nipple cannot be used with a flintlock shotgun.
With a flintlock, you may use a pipe cleaner to clear out the
flash hole, the flash channel, and the lower end of the barrel.
A commercial black powder solvent may be used to cleanse
the bore. But be careful! Some of these substances can dam-
age the finish of your stock. Use caution as to where you apply
them. Scrub up and down the bore with several patches well
saturated in a commercial cleaner or soap and water. This may
be followed by pouring water in the muzzle and pouring it back
out by inverting the barrel to flush out the worst of the fouling.
Then wipe the bore again to be sure all the fouling has been
removed. If it hasn’t, repeat the saturation and flushing process.
Step 2—Drying. Once the barrel has been thoroughly flushed
or cleaned, dry the whole apparatus. You can use a dry wool
shotgun mop or a series of cloth strips attached to your cleaning
rod by a slotted cleaning tip. Pass this fabric through the length
of the bore several times. This will dry the metallic surfaces
and remove any remaining foreign particles. The job is finished
when the fabric comes out both clean and dry.


78 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Muzzleloading Shotguns.
Cleaning the Lock
Locks are usually attached to the stock with one or two bolts.
You’ll have to remove the lock for cleaning.
First, set the hammer at half cock. Start unfastening the
bolts by unscrewing a few turns. Tap the bolt heads lightly. This
will loosen the lock plates from their mortise (their foundation
on the stock). You may then proceed with unscrewing the bolts.
Once they are removed, carefully lift the lock components off
the stock. This usually can be done with simple finger pressure.
If you run into trouble, insert a small diameter drift pin from
the right-hand lock and tap lightly. This should loosen the
left-hand lock to ease its removal. The right-hand lock should
now come off easily.
An old toothbrush steamed with very hot water should be
fine for removing any fouling and dirt from both sides of the
lock. Be sure you cover both sides of the lock. Don’t be afraid
of hot water. The hotter the water, the faster the lock will dry.
Thoroughly wipe dry the entire lock surface. Coat lightly with
gun oil and replace.
Finishing Up
Before the gun is reassembled, protect your stock surface by
wiping thoroughly with a clean patch or cloth dampened either
with water or stock cleaner. Dry thoroughly and follow up with
a light application of stock oil or wax preservative.
Before putting all the parts back together, make sure that
no moisture from cleaning fluids remains in any of the spaces
between the barrel and the stock. If hidden portions are still
damp when the gun is assembled, those sensitive places
could rust.
Once your gun is cleaned and oiled, it’s ready for storage.
Remember to keep it in a cool, dry place. Humidity can cause
rusting. The location of your storage area is a matter of personal
choice, and in many locations the storage of guns is regulated
by law. Check your state and local laws and rules. At minimum,
store your gun in a locked container or cabinet away from
unauthorized individuals.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 79
.Muzzleloading Shotguns
Learning to Shoot
The material earlier in this pamphlet covers the methods of
safety, firing the shot, and shooting at targets.
When dry-firing a muzzleloader, a little advance preparation
is required. The repeated striking of the hammer on the nipple
when no cap is covering it may result in damage.
In a percussion gun, the nipples can be protected by fitting
with a neoprene or rubber washer such as the one found on a
water faucet. Put the washer over the nipple. This will cushion
the blow of the hammer and absorb most of the force. If you
find the hammer still strikes the nipple, add another washer.
In a flintlock, you can provide similar protection by replacing
the flint with a similarly shaped piece of hardwood. This way, you
can experience the fall of the hammer and the action of the frizzen
without producing wear or tear on either.
Using rubber washers will aid in protecting the shotgun’s nipple
during dry-firing.





SHOTGUN SHOOTING 81
.Conservation and Hunting
A population
is all of the
individuals
of the same
species that
live in one place.
Conservation
and Hunting
Wildlife biologists have long recognized two key factors in
game management.
• Wildlife cannot be stockpiled like coal or oil. Any area of
land, or habitat, can support only a certain number of wild
animals. If a decision is made to have more game (wild animals
for hunting) in a specific area and it is stocked with additional
animals in excess of the biological carrying capacity of the habi-
tat area, what will happen? In time, all animals in excess of the
biological carrying capacity of the land will be eliminated by the
natural factors of disease, starvation, emigration, or predation.
• Wildlife species naturally overproduce each year. That
is, more young are produced than necessary to continue the
species, and more are produced than the habitat area can
support. The extra animals are lost to disease, starvation,
emigration, or predation. This is nature’s way of making
sure that there are enough surviving animals each year for
a breeding population and that the strongest strains survive
for reproduction. For example, only 8 percent of young
rabbits grow to breeding age.
These principles apply despite what people do with animals. If
extra animals are put into an occupied habitat, more animals than
normal will die. If a few extra animals are taken by hunters, the
remaining stock will soon bring the population up to a normal
A habitat is the place where a plant or animal
naturally or normally lives and grows.
Carrying capacity is the population of animals that
an area will support without being damaged.


82 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Conservation and Hunting.
range. Wildlife management experts try to arrange hunting seasons
and bag limits (limits on the number of animals taken) so that
hunters will harvest only the surplus. The hunting regulations they
set ensure that hunters do not take too many animals. It is far bet-
ter that hunters should get the healthful outdoor recreation and the
meat by harvesting the surplus than to lose those surplus animals
to disease, starvation, and other natural causes.
Without effective natural limiting factors, natural reproduc-
tion will cause an animal population to grow too large, and the
result is damage to the habitat. For example, an unmanaged
population of grazing animals such as deer will grow until its
food and water supply will no longer support its members. In
such situations, the large numbers of animals severely dam-
age the plants in their habitat by overgrazing or browsing and
by trampling the plants. Plants exposed to this kind of grazing
pressure will not return to their former level of productivity
for many years. The loss of productivity is equally harmful to
other wildlife species with similar food and survival needs.
When it becomes obvious that a population is too large, it
is important to increase the harvest and get the herd down to its
biological carrying capacity. Game managers will often extend
the hunting season and/or increase the bag limit to thin out the
population. By harvesting animals that would otherwise be lost
to causes such as starvation and disease, the hunter becomes a
responsible participant in natural biological processes.
The real problem for wildlife is what humankind has done,
and is doing, to the habitats where these animals must live.
People are replacing woods, fields, and marshes with subdivi-
sions, shopping centers, superhighways, industrial complexes,
and airports. These changes lead to the destruction or alteration
of habitats and to a smaller number of game animals.
(For more about these ideas, see the Environmental Science
and Fish and Wildlife Management merit badge pamphlets.)
A limiting factor is anything that limits the survival,
reproduction, or number of animals in an area.
Productivity in plants is the power to bear or yield food
abundantly.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 83
.Conservation and Hunting
Hunting Regulations
Each state has its own hunting regulations. These are issued
by the state fish and wildlife agency, conservation department,
or similar organization that is responsible for the state’s
fish and wildlife management program. You can get a copy
of the regulations by writing to the correct department at
your state capital, or by looking online (with your parent or
guardian’s permission) at the state agency that enforces hunting
regulations. Locally, sporting goods and hardware stores that
sell hunting and fishing licenses and equipment usually can
supply a copy of the regulations. Your merit badge counselor
can help you with this, also.
There are many differences in the state game laws. Hunting
in Kansas is unlike hunting in California or New York. Differ-
ences in geography, human population, and game species call
for different game laws. Even within a state, there will be some
differences in game laws. Certain areas or counties may have
different laws because of local conditions.
All states have regulations regarding the use or carrying of
guns when hunting. These laws are designed to protect those
in the hunting neighborhood. Such regulations may prohibit
carrying a loaded gun in a car, shooting from a car, or shooting
near buildings or roads. Many states control the type and caliber
of gun that can be used for certain kinds of hunting.
The states require hunters to carry a hunting license. This
helps them control the game harvest, and the license fees provide
money for habitat improvement and game management. To get
a hunting license for the first time, all states require the hunter
to satisfactorily complete the hunter safety course initially devel-
oped by the National Rifle Association and now administered by
each state’s hunter education program. These courses are taught
by volunteer instructors. (Several states “grandfathered” people
born before a specified date, and those hunters were not required
to take a hunter safety course. In other states, people who were
licensed hunters in the state before a specific date established by
law or regulation were not required to take a hunter safety course.)
Even if your state does not require you to take such a course,
it is certainly worth your time to take it before you start hunting.
You will find it interesting and informative. And if you have earned
the Shotgun Shooting merit badge, you will find it easy.
In hunting
language, big
game usually
refers to such
animals as deer,
elk, moose,
antelope, and
bear. Small game
includes animals
such as rabbits
and squirrels.
Upland game
includes quail,
grouse, partridge,
and ptarmigan.
Waterfowl
includes birds
such as ducks,
geese, and coot.


84 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Conservation and Hunting.
Sportsmanship
Sportsmanship applies to all of shooting, whether recreational,
competitive, or hunting. True sportsmanship means following
the Golden Rule: Treat others as you would like them to
treat you.
• Know and always follow the rules of safe gun handling
at home, on the range, and in the field. Know and strictly
follow the laws regarding possession and use of firearms.
• Know and follow the letter and spirit of the
hunting regulations.
• Be considerate of the landowner whose property you may be
using. Ask permission to hunt on the property. Do not litter the
area with trash.
• Be careful of the target, both for safety and also to avoid
senseless destruction. Do not shoot powerline insulators,
pipeline valves, signs, or similar property. Confine your shots
to proper targets.
• When hunting in the field, give fellow hunters a fair chance
at game. Do not take unfair advantage of another shooter in
any way.
The accomplishment of taking game during the hunt is only
part of the experience. Enjoying the outdoors, seeing wildlife,
and stalking game are also pleasurable parts of the hunt.





86 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Glossary.
Glossary
action. The group of moving parts that allow the shooter to
load, fire, and unload a gun.
ammunition. The projectiles with their cases, primers, and
propelling charges that are fired from guns; shells.
autoloader. A repeating firearm. After it is loaded and cocked
manually by the shooter for the first shot, the firearm then
automatically loads a new cartridge from the magazine into
the firing chamber and cocks itself for the next shot. See
also semiautomatic.
barrel. The smooth tube through which the projectile passes.
bead. A spherical or cylindrical attachment on top of a shotgun
barrel near the muzzle that assists in mounting and pointing
the shotgun. A second bead may be located near the middle
of the barrel.
bench rod. A ramrod with a large handle, made of brass, stainless
steel, or other unbreakable material. Using a bench rod when
target shooting is more comfortable for the shooter.
black powder. Gunpowder that burns explosively.
bore. The interior of a gun barrel.
breech. The rear position of a shotgun, usually the rear
opening of the chamber into the barrel.
Black powder
(see page 67
for guide to
granulations
Fg FFg FFFg FFFFg Black powder
substitute


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 87
.Glossary
breechblock. A movable block of metal that closes the
chamber at the rear and supports the base of the cartridge
during firing.
breechloader. Any gun that is loaded from the breech, usually
with a cartridge, as distinguished from a muzzleloader.
breech plug. A plug threaded into the breech of the barrel of
a muzzleloading gun, to seal the breech against the rearward
escape of gases when the gun is fired.
butt. The rear end of a gunstock.
case. The container, usually of plastic or paper with a brass
head, that holds ammunition parts.
chamber. The rear portion of the gun barrel into which a shell is
inserted for firing. “To chamber” is to insert a shell into the breech
of a gun.
charging the barrel. Dispensing a specific amount of black
powder directly into the muzzle of a firearm.
choke. A constriction near a shotgun muzzle that controls the
spread of the fired shot charge.
clay target. A round, usually dome-shaped, easily
breakable disk made of pitch that is thrown as a flying
target for shotgun shooters. Also called “clay bird” and
“clay pigeon.”
cock. The hammer of a muzzleloader. “To cock” is to
place the hammer of a firearm in the firing position.
comb. The upper edge of a stock. The shooter’s cheekbone
rests on the comb.
drum. A cylindrical piece of steel holding the nipple in a
percussion gun.
dry-firing. Simulating shooting with an unloaded firearm,
including cocking it and pulling the trigger; used to practice
gun handling and control.
firing line. At a target range, the line along which shooters
are positioned.
firing pin. The device that strikes that primer in the cartridge,
igniting the primer by causing an indentation that crushes the
priming compound.
Clay target


88 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Glossary.
flash channel. A small hole between the inside of the barrel
and the priming pan in a muzzleloading gun; see flash hole.
flash hole. A fire hole used in muzzleloaders; a small hole
through the breech that runs from the ignition source to the
powder charge.
flint. In a flintlock, the piece of stone that strikes the steel
frizzen face to produce a shower of sparks, thus igniting the
priming charge and, subsequently, the main charge in the barrel.
flintlock. A muzzleloader with a hammer, or cock, that holds a
flint in screw-tightened jaws; having a frizzen, or striking plate;
a pan in which the priming charge is placed; and a flash hole
through which the flame passes to the main charge in the barrel.
follow-through. Maintaining gun mount and movement briefly
after firing the shot.
forearm. See fore-end.
fore-end. That part of a gun’s stock forward of the action,
extending under the barrel and providing a grip for one hand
below the barrel.
frizzen. In a flintlock, the spring-loaded cover of the priming
pan, with an upright steel plate against which the flint strikes,
producing the sparks that ignite the powder.
frizzen face. The striking surface of a frizzen.
full cock. The position of the cock or hammer when ready for
firing. See half cock.
Follow-through


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 89
.Glossary
gauge. A measure of shotgun bore size equivalent to the
number of lead balls of bore diameter required to weigh one
pound.
grip. The part of the stock gripped by the firing hand.
Sometimes called the small of the stock.
gunsmith. A person who designs, makes, or repairs guns.
half cock. A hammer position at the midpoint of hammer
travel; an intermediate safety position for the cock or hammer.
See full cock.
hammer. The part that strikes the percussion cap in muzzle-
loaders or the primer in cartridge arms. Some hammers directly
strike the cap or primer, while others strike a separate firing
pin. The hammer on flintlocks is called the cock.
hangfire. A delay in the ignition of a cartridge at the time of
firing, often described as the “click” of the firing pin being
followed by a delay, then the “bang” of firing.
hinge. A type of shotgun action that opens like the movement
of a door hinge; when the release lever is pushed to one side,
the barrel swings downward.
hooked breech. A style of muzzleloading shotgun in which the
barrel can be removed from the standing breech.
jag. The end of a cleaning rod, having grooves or ridges that
grip a cleaning patch or swabbing material.
live firing. Shooting with a loaded firearm, using
live ammunition.
load. A particular combination of case, primer, powder, and
shot. “To load” is to charge a firearm with ammunition.
lock. The firing mechanism of early firearms. See flintlock
and matchlock.
magazine. In a repeating firearm, the container in which
shells are stored before loading, one by one, into
the chamber.
10 GAUGE 12 GAUGE 16 GAUGE 20 GAUGE 28 GAUGE .410 BORE
Gauge


90 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Glossary.
match. The fuse, wick, or smoldering cord used in
matchlock firearms.
matchlock. A muzzleloader in which a lighted match is
touched to the powder in the priming pan, igniting the priming
charge, which in turn shoots its flame through the flash hole
to set off the powder charge in the barrel.
misfire. The failure of a round to fire.
muzzle. The forward end (mouth) of the barrel, through which
the shot exits.
muzzle velocity. The speed of the shot measured as it leaves
the muzzle of the barrel.
muzzleloader. Any gun that must be loaded through the
muzzle by charging first with black powder, followed by
a projectile.
nipple. The cone-shaped seat on
which a percussion cap is placed
and detonated by the hammer of
a muzzleloader. The nipple has
a hole through it to let the flame
from the cap travel to the powder
charge in the barrel.
pan. On matchlock, wheel lock,
and flintlock guns, a small, shallow
container for priming powder.
patch. A piece of material, always
cotton, fitted around a round ball
in a muzzleloading gun to provide
a gas seal and to impart spin to
the ball.
pellet. A single piece of shot.
NIPPLE


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 91
.Glossary
percussion cap. A small metal cup containing a priming
mixture (detonating powder), placed open-end-down over
a nipple that has a vent hole leading into the main powder
charge in the barrel of a percussion rifle. When struck by the
hammer, the cap sends a small jet of flame into the powder
charge, igniting it.
possibles bag. A pouch carried by a muzzleloader shooter, for
packing necessary gear.
powder charge. A measured amount of a chemical compound
that, when ignited by the primer, generates gases that expand
rapidly and produce high pressure, providing the force needed
to propel a projectile. In modern cartridges, the powder charge
is contained within the case. In muzzleloading rifles, the pow-
der charge is loaded into the barrel through the muzzle. The
black powder used in muzzleloaders is quite different from the
powder used in modern cartridges.
powder horn or powder flask. A container for holding black
powder. Modern powder flasks are usually made of metal, with
a spout on one end and a lever at the side that opens the flask
to pour out a measured amount of powder.
powder measure. A device for measuring and dispensing
precise quantities of powder.
primer. In cartridge arms, an impact-sensitive chemical mixture
that ignites when hit by the firing pin, igniting the powder
charge. Also, in centerfire ammunition, the metal cup or pocket
that contains the primer.
priming powder. The fine-grained powder that is used in
the pan of a flintlock and that, when set off, ignites the main
charge of powder.
projectile. Any solid material propelled through the gun barrel
by pressure—a bullet, ball, BB, pellet, etc.
pull. The command spoken by a clay target shooter to request
the target to be thrown.
pump action. A term applied to repeating firearms activated
by a sliding action that is operated by moving a handgrip below
the barrel backward and forward.
ramrod. A rod used in loading and cleaning muzzle-
loading guns.
Percussion cap


92 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Glossary.
receiver. The frame for the action parts of a gun, and the part
of the firearm around which the rest of the arm is built. A fire-
arm’s stock is attached to the receiver; the barrel is screwed or
locked into the receiver; and the receiver also accepts the bolt,
magazine, trigger mechanism, etc.
recoil. The rearward movement of the gun in reaction to the
forward movement of the projectile and powder gas emerging
from the muzzle; the kickback of a gun upon firing.
repeater. See semiautomatic.
rib. A flat steel bar attached to the top of the length of a
shotgun barrel.
round. Another name for a cartridge, or a series of a certain
number of shots.
safety. A device that prevents a firearm from being accidentally
fired, normally by blocking the trigger or the hammer action or
by locking the bolt or lever.
semiautomatic. A firearm that fires the cartridge in the chamber,
ejects the fired casing, and chambers a fresh round from the
magazine with each pull of the trigger. See also autoloader.
shot. Small spheres of metal, usually lead or steel, used as
projectiles in shotgun ammunition.
shotshell. A cartridge comprised of a case, primer, powder,
wad, and shot designed to be fired in a shotgun.
sight picture. The visual relationship between the target and
the gun’s muzzle.
slide action. See pump action.
squib load. A round that fires but may not produce enough gas
pressure to force the wad out of the barrel.
Shotshell


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 93
.Glossary
stock. The part of the rifle that the shooter grasps, usually made
of wood, and consisting of the butt, comb, grip, and fore-end.
tang. The part of a firearm’s receiver that extends to the rear
and is used to attach the action to the stock.
thimbles. Short metal tubes used to secure the ramrod under
the barrel of a muzzleloading gun.
trigger. The lever that causes a firearm to fire when moved,
usually pulled by one finger.
trigger guard. A protective shield around the trigger that
guards against accidental release of the trigger.
trigger pull. The amount of pressure needed to fully release
a trigger to fire a gun.
wad. Cylindrical plastic or fiber component of a shotshell
or muzzleloading shotgun load used to separate the powder
charge from the shot and prevent combustion gases from
bypassing the shot charge upon firing, or to retain the shot
charge prior to firing.
wrist. The part of the stock between the butt and the fore-end
that is gripped by the trigger-hand.
STOCK


94 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Shooting Resources.
Shotgun Shooting Resources
Scouting Literature
Environmental Science, Fish and Wildlife
Management, and Rifle Shooting merit
badge pamphlets; Guide to Safe Scouting;
National Range and Target Activities
Manual
Books
Bridges, Toby. Muzzleloading. Creative
Publishing, 1997.
Brister, Bob. Shotgunning: The Art and
the Science. Winchester Press, 1977.
Galan, J. I. Airgun Digest. DBI
Books, 1995.
Henderson, David R. Gunsmithing
Shotguns: A Basic Guide to Care and
Repair. Lyons Press, 2003.
Malloy, John. Complete Guide to Guns
and Shooting. DBI Books, 1995.
McIntosh, Michael. Shotguns and
Shooting: A Celebration of the Gun.
Countrysport Press, 1995.
Meyer, Jerry. The Clay Target
Handbook. Lyons Press, 1995.
Migdalski, Tom. The Complete Book
of Shotgunning Games. McGraw-
Hill, 1998.
Morrow, Tom. The Orvis Field Guide
to Shotgun Care and Maintenance.
Willow Creek Press, 2000.
Re, Lois. Black’s Wing and Clay:
The Complete Shotgunner’s Guide
to Equipment, Instruction, and
Destinations. Masters Press, 1999.
Russell, James. Precision Shooting: The
Trapshooter’s Bible for the Advanced
Trapshooter and Those Who Strive to
Be. James Russell, 1998.
Russell, James. Trapshooting Secrets.
James Russell, 1999.
Organizations and Websites
Alco Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 888-258-4814
alcotarget.com
Amateur Trapshooting Association
Telephone: 618-449-2224
shootata.com
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


SHOTGUN SHOOTING 95
.Shotgun Shooting Resources
American Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 877-733-0433
americantargetcompany.com
Log Cabin Shop
logcabinshop.com
Michaels of Oregon
michaels-oregon.com
National Rifle Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-672-3888
home.nra.org
National Shooting
Sports Foundation
Telephone: 203-426-1320
nssf.org
National Skeet Shooting Association
National Sporting Clays Association
Toll-free telephone: 800-877-5338
nssa-nsca.com
National Target Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-827-7060
nationaltarget.com
Remington Arms Company
Toll-free telephone: 800-243-9700
remington.com
Shotgun Sports Magazine
Telephone: 530-889-2220
shotgunsportsmagazine.com
Target Barn Inc.
Telephone: 419-829-2242
targetbarn.com
The Target Shop
Telephone: 856-358-5140
thetargetshop.com
Trapshooters.com
trapshooters.com
U.S. Target Inc.
Toll-free telephone: 800-746-6836
ustargetinc.com
USA Shooting
Telephone: 719-866-4670
usashooting.com
Photo and Illustration Credits
Hoppe’s®, courtesy—page 32
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property
of or are protected by Scouting
America.
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 12, 16–18, 20, 37, 41, 47, and 88


96 SHOTGUN SHOOTING
Shotgun Shooting Resources.
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the men
and women serving on the National
Merit Badge Subcommittee for the
improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Thanks to the NRA
For their indispensable contributions to this edition of the Shotgun
Shooting merit badge pamphlet, Scouting America thanks the National
Rifle Association Department of Education and Training. Thanks to Clark
D. Guy, National Camping School range and target activities director and
member of the Scouting America National Range and Target Activities
Subcommittee, for his assistance with revisions for this printing.