SOIL AND WATER
CONSERVATION
STEM-Based


SOIL AND WATER
CONSERVATION
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35952
ISBN 978-0-8395-3291-0
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing
FPO


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Soil-And-Water-Conservation or
check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.


4 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 5





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 7
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
What Is Soil? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
How Water Behaves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
Causes and Effects of Erosion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Conservation on the Land . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Conservation in Watersheds . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Water Pollution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63
Conservation and Agriculture. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
How You Can Help . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 9
.Introduction
Introduction
On Earth, all living things have moved through self-renewing
life cycles, have depended on air and water, have grown and
died. All these life-forms are tied together. To survive, they
all—plants, animals, birds, insects, and organisms too small
to be seen without a microscope—need air, water, soil, and
sunlight in some form.
All life-forms are closely linked and depend on one
another for their existence; this is called the “web
of nature.” If one strand of the web is damaged or
destroyed, the other strands will feel the result in some
way. If the web is strong, with all parts working well, a
wholesome environment on Earth will flourish for people
and all other living things.
It takes the attention and help of many people
to keep Earth’s environment in good working
order to support its growing population,
which must have air, water, food, clothing,
shelter, and living space.


10 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Introduction.
Our Responsibility to Learn
We all have a place in the great web of nature and should
be concerned about what happens to the soil, water, and all
things we call natural resources. We all have a duty to learn
more about the natural resources on which our lives depend
so that we can help make sure that these resources are used
intelligently and cared for properly.
Conservation isn’t just the responsibility of soil and plant
scientists, hydrologists, wildlife managers, landowners, and the
forest or mine owner alone. It must be your duty, too. To enjoy
woods, wildlife, and flowers; clean water; natural open spaces
near our homes; and a good food supply, then you, too, must
be a conservationist.
To be a natural resource conservationist, you must have a
good knowledge of those natural resources. The Soil and Water
Conservation merit badge will introduce you to the fascinating
world of soil and water—and to the plants and animals that
share Earth with us. To understand soil and water conservation
as a whole, we must first study parts of it. This is why soil and
water are discussed separately first, before they are considered
as an inseparable whole. As you learn more about soil and
water conservation and carry out your conservation projects,
you will begin to see that it is nearly impossible to separate soil
and water as parts of Earth’s natural resources.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 11
.Introduction
As you begin work on your Soil and Water Conservation merit badge,
discuss the requirements with your counselor. Your counselor can help
you choose projects that you can do readily and from which you can
learn the most, depending on where you live.
Try This Dirty Job
As you learn more about soil
and water conservation, you
might find a career in soil
conservation intrigues you.
This position offers opportunities
in government and private and
nonprofit sectors. You will likely
get to work in the outdoors,
performing land-use and soil
surveys. Or you might plan how to prevent erosion or develop practices
for sustainable land use. In most cases, you will need a bachelor’s degree
in agricultural science or environmental studies.





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 13
.What Is Soil?
What Is Soil?
Soil is not living, but it supports life. We walk, play, travel, and
build on it. You call it dirt and don’t think much about it, but
your life and that of all other creatures depend completely on
the relatively thin layer of soil that has developed on most of
the land surface of Earth. If you look closely at some soil, you’ll
see many bits of rock, mineral crystals, plant roots, decayed
leaves and other materials, worms, tiny living and dead plants
and animals, water, and air. Though the proportions vary, all
soil consists of mineral and organic matter, water, and air.
Understanding how soils form, how soils differ, and how
plants use soil will help you better understand and appreciate
the importance of soil for life.
Physical and Chemical Changes
Most soils developed largely from various kinds of rocks. Over
thousands of years, the forces of nature—sun, wind, rain, frost,
glacial ice, chemical and biological reactions—break rocks into
smaller and smaller pieces. The sun warms the rock and the
rock expands; at night the rock cools and contracts. This expan-
sion and contraction opens tiny cracks in the rock. Moisture
from rain or snow gets into the cracks and helps force the rock
pieces farther apart. More water enters to repeat the cycle.
soil. A self-
renewing
compound of
rock and mineral
particles, organic
material, living
organisms, air,
and moisture.
Recognizing how important soil is in the web of
nature, Charles E. Kellogg, a soil scientist and chief
of the Soil Survey for almost 40 years, wrote that
“essentially, all life depends upon the soil. ... There
can be no life without soil and no soil without life;
they have evolved together.”


14 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
What Is Soil?.
After some pieces have broken off the rock, the wind
blows them, or running water grinds them, against other rocks.
Huge glaciers that once moved across the northern United
States twisted and shifted and ground up tremendous quantities
of rock, greatly changing the landscape.
Chemical reactions also help advance the alteration of
rocks. Falling rain picks up a little carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere that, when joined with hydrogen, forms a weak
acid—yet one powerful enough to dissolve certain mineral salts.
These dissolved substances cause other chemical changes to
occur in the rocks.
Soil Formation
The crumbling of rock is a process that leads to soil formation.
Finely ground or splintered rock will not become soil until it
begins to surge with life. Living and once-living plants and ani-
mals—organic matter—help give soil a physical structure that
admits moisture and air and helps the soil retain them. To be
useful, soil must keep its structure.
Nature’s forces
slowly crumble
rocks into mineral
particles of clay,
sand, and silt.
The forces of nature helped shape these rock formations in
eastern Utah.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 15
.What Is Soil?
As bits of crumbled material and moisture collect on a rock,
simple plants called lichens begin to grow. After some time,
water, decaying lichens, and more bits of mineral matter collect
in the rock crevices. Soon, microscopic forms of plant and ani-
mal life begin to make the crevices their home. Mosses begin to
grow on the rock, and later the seeds of larger plants germinate
in this loose earthy material; these weeds, grasses, and other
plants grow, die, and decay, thereby supplying organic matter.
The shape, or topography, of the land on which soil devel-
ops helps determine the soil’s quality. The topography—steep-
ness of slope, direction of slope, elevation—determines the
patterns of water movement and accumulation as well as the
amount of the sun’s heat that reaches the surface of the land.
Plants are the
real makers of
soil. At the same
time, chemical
reactions are
happening, and
bacteria, fungi,
worms, tunneling
and burrowing
insects, and other
organisms are
active. Thus the
formation of a
simple soil begins.
Entirely different
soils can
come from the
same rocks.
Rub two pieces of rough rock together vigorously to get an idea
of how long it would take for physical forces to break down rocks
into the material from which soil develops. You have to rub a long
time to get even a spoonful of tiny particles!
To build just 1 inch of the surface soil could take
100 years. In places where the climate is dry and
cold, an inch of surface soil might not develop in
1,000 years. Left unprotected, this soil could be lost
in one rainstorm. This is why it is so important to care
for the soil we have.


16 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
What Is Soil?.
The Many Kinds of Soil
Soil scientists have identified more than 70,000 kinds of soil in
the United States. Climate, parent rocks, plant and animal life,
topography, and time all affect the development of soils and
cause soils to be different. Particularly important is the climate,
especially temperature and the amount of rainfall. Climate
determines not only how fast and in what way rocks are broken
into fragments, but, more importantly, what kinds of plants
grow in a particular place. In turn, the kind of plants that grow,
as well as how fast dead ones decay, and the kind and activity
of soil organisms determine the kind of soil that develops.
By looking at a cross section of Earth, we would see that
the outer layer—the soil—is very thin compared with the diam-
eter of the whole planet. Soil depth actually ranges from many
feet, where wind and water have deposited soil materials over
time, to less than an inch in places where the climate and other
factors have hindered soil development or where soil loss has
occurred because of erosion or natural disasters.
The Soil Profile
Soil has three dimensions. It is bounded on the top by the sur-
face of the land (and sometimes ice or water), on the bottom by
rock material, and on the sides by other soils. A cross section of
soil in a newly cut road or the excavation for the basement of a
new building will show definite layers. This succession of layers
from the soil surface down to broken, weathered rock is called a
soil profile. The different layers are known as horizons.
UPPER MANTLE
LOWER MANTLE
D-DOUBLE-PRIME LAYER
OUTER CORE
(MOLTEN)
INNER CORE
(SOLID)
CRUST
0 TO 31 MILES
250 MILES
406 MILES
1,688 MILES
1,806 MILES
3,219 MILES
3,981 MILES
Peat is a kind of
soil that consists
almost entirely of
organic matter.
You will usually
find it where
there were once
lakes, ponds,
or marshes.
Each horizon
differs in one or
more properties,
such as color,
texture, structure,
porosity (how
many pores —
tiny holes that let
in moisture—
it has), and
chemical content.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 17
.What Is Soil?
The soil profile carries the soil’s history.
For instance, the profile of the particular type
of soil that develops in a forest looks much
different from the profile of soil where only
grasses grew or where desert conditions exist.
Soil layers differ in thickness and in
color—surface soils can be black or dark
brown, gray, or red. Organic matter usually
makes a soil dark. Other layers in the soil
profile usually are lighter in color than the
surface soil. Their colors—yellow, red, white,
or maybe even somewhat blue—come from
rock and from chemical reactions that have
happened over a long time.
Soils may look the same on the surface,
they can be quite different underneath. To
better understand the differences, look at
several different soil profiles exposed along
steep road banks or in construction excava-
tions or grading activities. Explain some of
the things you see and have learned about
soil to other Scouts, your leaders, friends, or
family members.
Most soil profiles include three master horizons.
The top layer—the one we usually think of when we
use the word soil—is called surface soil. From it, many
plants get most of the moisture and nutrients they need
to survive. Below the surface soil is a layer called
subsoil, and
then another
layer called soil
parent material,
which is largely
loose and partly
decayed rock
that might
someday devel-
op into soil.
SURFACE SOIL
SUBSOIL
BEDROCK
PARENT MATERIAL
Soil profile
A soil profile can tell a great deal
about the past climate of an area
and about the plants that grew
there many years ago.
In some places,
if the cut for the
soil profile is deep
enough, you can
see solid rock
called bedrock
below the soil’s
parent material.


18 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
What Is Soil?.
Three Sizes of Particles
Another characteristic of a soil is the size of the solid particles
it contains. In describing soils, the different-sized particles are
called sand, silt, and clay.
Take some soil between your fingers. If it feels coarse and
gritty and you can just barely see individual particles, it must
contain a large proportion of sand—particles that range from
0.05 to 2.0 millimeters in diameter.
Fine soil feels smooth like flour. Moisten some and work
it into a thin ribbon between your thumb and forefinger. If
the ribbon breaks off near your fingers each time, chances
are the soil is largely silt—particles ranging from 0.002 to 0.05
millimeters in diameter. You cannot see the individual particles
without using a strong magnifying glass.
Does the soil between your fingers feel like fine powder
when dry? After you moisten it, does it make at least an inch-
long ribbon before breaking when you work it between your
thumb and finger? If so, you have mostly clay—particles smaller
than silt and less than 0.002 millimeters in diameter.
When soils experts refer to soil texture, they are talking about
the size of the soil particles. When a soil is identified as a loam
(this term refers only to the size of particles it contains), it means
that the soil contains a relatively even mixture of sand and silt
and a somewhat smaller proportion of clay. This generally is a
desirable quality in soil.
Try this experiment. Fill a jar
two-thirds full of water and
pour in a cup of soil. Shake it
vigorously and then let it stand
for several hours. Hold a piece
of paper against the side of the
jar and draw a diagram of the
layers to make your own soil
chart. Do the layers look like
these? Explain why the largest
particles settle on the bottom.
CLAY
Soil particle chart
SILT
FINE
SAND
COARSE
SAND


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 19
.What Is Soil?
Naming Soils and Soil Surveys
Soils usually are named after the towns or localities near where
they were first defined. Because several soils in the same local-
ity might have similar texture, descriptive words are added
to give specific soil names, such as Miami silt loam, Houston
sandy clay, or Mohave sandy loam.
Soils vary widely in their ability to support plant life and
in how well they are suited for building. To manage a soil intel-
ligently and care for it properly, people must know something
about its characteristics. This is the reason for making soil
surveys—inventories of soil resources that show the extent and
location of different kinds of soil.
The soil scientist bores holes in the soil with a boring tool
called an auger, usually to a depth of 3 to 5 feet. By studying
this soil core and the exposed soil profiles, the scientist can
determine many soil characteristics and thus can outline on
aerial photographs the boundaries of different soils. Samples
of the soil are sent to laboratories for chemical and physical
tests that cannot be made in the field.
When this research on the soil is completed, all
the measurements, observations, and test results are
published in the soil survey. This report includes
maps showing the boundaries of different kinds of
soil; the description, name, and classification of
each soil in the area; and the information that
landowners, conservationists, engineers, and
others who will work with the soil need to
determine possible safe uses of the land and
how it needs to be cared for when used for
different purposes.
A silty clay loam
soil contains a
fairly high
proportion of clay
particles—27 to
40 percent—with
the remainder
being sand
and silt-sized
particles.
Soil information on most of the nation’s
counties can be found on the website of
the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s Natural
Resources Conservation Service. The NRCS helps
people conserve, maintain, and improve our natural
resources and environment. With your parent or guard-
ian’s permission, visit websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app/.
Soil samples can be extracted easily
and quickly with a hydraulic soil probe.


20 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
What Is Soil?.
Using a Soil Survey
Soil surveys have been completed on
more than 95 percent of all land in the
United States. Usually, these reports
cover one county. From this report,
you can learn the names and the char-
acteristics of some of the soils in your
part of the country.
Many people find published soil
surveys useful. The surveys contain
information called soil interpretations.
People who want to use the land for
different purposes need to know about
different characteristics of the soil.
For example, a soil might be good for
growing crops, but a pond built on it
might never fill up because the water
drains away too quickly.
Soil interpretations can help home-
owners learn what kinds of plants they
can expect to grow successfully, but
more is at stake than growing things
where office buildings, homes, factories, airports, highways, and
other land uses are planned. Some soils give excellent support to
buildings; others sink or slide under weight. Foundations or even
the upper parts of buildings can shift or crack if they are on soils
that expand when wet or shrink when dry. Septic systems for the
disposal of household wastes work well in soils with good drain-
age characteristics, but some soils dry so slowly or have such
high water tables during certain periods of the year that septic
systems cannot be used. And some soils contain minerals and
chemicals that quickly corrode gas, water, or electric conduits
or cause concrete to disintegrate.
Paying attention to soil interpretations can
help builders and landowners avoid this
kind of disaster. Soil slippage and swelling
caused this house to break apart.
Soil interpreta-
tions tell whether
land can be used
in a certain way
or something
about how to
manage a tract of
land for a use that
has already been
determined.
Many people use soil-survey information, including
city and regional planners, engineers, Scout camp
officials, highway departments, farmers, tax assessors,
construction contractors, architects, utility companies,
and landscape architects.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 21
.What Is Soil?
Land-Capability Classification
The most widely used soil interpretation is the land-capability
classification. This system classifies individual soils according
to their capabilities and limitations, such as crops that will grow
there, or the risk of erosion damage if they are mismanaged.
Farmers, ranchers, and others use this classification scheme to
help them develop conservation plans for their lands.
There are eight land-capability classifications. The risks of
soil damage and the limitations to use of the land increase from
class I to class VIII. For example, land in capability class I is the
best for farming. It is almost level and not subject to erosion;
generally it is fertile, and there are no problems with water
management. Land in capability class VIII is not suitable for
crops, grazing, or forestry; it may be extremely dry, wet, sandy,
stony, and steep, rough, or badly eroded. Desert areas, swamps,
some rugged mountains, and sand dunes are examples of land
in this class.
Land-capability classification
Find out whether a written conservation plan is available for the property
on which your Scout camp is located. If such a plan exists, study its soil
and land-capability maps. Using what you have learned so far, determine
whether the land has been used to its best capabilities. Are there areas
where the plan hasn’t been followed? If so, what can you do about it?


What Is Soil?.
Plant Nutrients
Why are some lawns greener and more lush than others? Why
do some gardens and orchards produce tastier vegetables and
fruits? Why are crop yields on some farms much larger than on
ones nearby? There may be several reasons, but an important
one is the presence or absence of nutrients that plants need for
growth and development.
Whenever we remove plants from the land, we take away
nutrients that could be used in future plant growth. If the plants
are allowed to decompose there, nutrients usually are added
to the soil as the dead plants again become part of the organic
matter in the soil. But in most cases, we harvest crops. We take
vegetables and flowers from gardens. Cattle graze on grass. We
cut hay to feed the cows that provide our milk.
When animals eat plants grown on soil
that doesn’t have the right nutrients, and
when people, in turn, eat the products sup-
plied from animals, no one gets the nutrients
needed for best growth and health. Improper
or careless use of soil causes plant nutrients
to rapidly deplete. Also, water moving down-
ward through certain soils carries soluble plant
nutrients into the subsoil where plant roots
cannot reach them. This is called leaching.
Plants usually can get adequate amounts
of carbon, hydrogen, and oxygen from
water and air.
Most plant
nutrients are
located in
the topsoil.
According to the USDA, Economic Research Service,
Land and Natural Resources, as of 2017, the U.S. land
area amounts to 2.26 billion acres. Approximately half
of this, 1.2 billion acres, is used for agriculture. Of the
1.2 billion acres; 390 million acres are used for cropland
and 659 million acres are used for grassland, pasture,
and range. 132 million acres are used for grazed forest-
land and 6 million acres for farmstead and farm roads.
These numbers represent a 6% decline in land use for
agriculture from 1959 to 2017. In the same time period,
the amount of urban land has tripled to 74 million acres.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 23
.What Is Soil?
Plants Need a Balanced Diet
Fertile soil can supply the complete nutritional needs of a
growing plant. The three principal plant nutrients are nitrogen,
phosphorus, and potassium. Plants usually need only exceeding-
ly small or trace amounts of sulfur, calcium, iron, manganese,
magnesium, molybdenum, boron, copper, zinc, and several
dozen other chemical elements, but they must have them. A
plant that lacks an essential nutrient will show physical signs
of the deficiency. Chemical soil tests help determine how much
of which nutrients are needed for the best growth of different
kinds of plants.
As far back as around 200 B.C., the Romans already knew
how to maintain soil fertility: crop rotation (planting different
crops on a piece of land in a planned sequence), adding lime
to soils to reduce acidity, adding manure, growing legumes
(peas, beans). These methods all are still used today. For cen-
turies, people who lived along the banks of rivers and streams
have recognized that the annual floods that covered their land
with sediment-rich water led to better crops. In 1699, John
Woodward experimented by growing plants in water containing
differing amounts of sediment. He found that the plant growth
improved as the amount of sediment in water increased.
Loose and crumbly
soil has many
pores for water
and air—it has
good structure.
These soils were found only 25 feet apart but have very differ-
ent structures. The soil on the left came from a cultivated field;
the soil on the right, from uncultivated fencerow (land occupied
by a fence and the area surrounding it on either side). The loose,
crumbly soil, right, can absorb water 20 times faster than the
compacted soil on the left.


24 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
What Is Soil?.
Fertilizers
Early American colonists received help from Indians who insisted
that one fish be planted with each seed. The decomposed fish
supplied the growing plant with nitrogen and phosphorous. In
some places, seaweed has been used for centuries as a fertilizer
for crops. By the late 1880s, research into fertilizers picked up.
Scientists focused on the essential elements in fertilizers, the best
time for application, and fertilizer formulas.
To fertilize gardens and crops of high value such as cotton,
naturally occurring and readily available materials—cotton-
seed meal, dried blood, fish meal, guano—were used. Animal
manure and crop residues also have been used as fertilizers.
These materials help replenish plant nutrients and supply organ-
ic matter essential for maintaining desirable soil structure.
Since the early 1920s, use of manufactured fertilizers has
become more common. Most fertilizers supply one or more of
the nutrients—nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium—that plants
use the most. As people developed plants that yielded much
larger quantities of food and animal feed—hybrid corn, for exam-
ple—they had to supply these plants with the nutrients necessary
for high production. Thus, the total nutrient tonnage of manufac-
tured fertilizer used in the United States increased almost eight
times from 1945 to 1977, from 2.8 million tons to more than 22
million tons. Fertilizer usage in the United States has fluctuated
by only 2 to 3 percent around this total since the 1970s.
According to the USDA, the consumption of agricultural
fertilizers in the United States has remained fairly stable over
the last decade. In 2021, it stood at nearly 19 million metric
tons. Nitrogen was the most used fertilizer nutrient, with a
consumption of some 11.17 million metric tons.
nutrient tonnage.
The actual weight
of the nitrogen,
phosphorus,
produced.
Today’s farmers
are learning how
to reduce the use
of commercial
fertilizers by
utilizing natural
nutrients such
as manure.
Gardeners often make a compost pile and use the decayed organic mate-
rial from it to fertilize and improve the soils in which they grow flowers
and vegetables. Leaves, grass clippings, dead garden plants, vegetable
scraps, and other raw organic material placed in a pile and kept fairly moist
usually will rot and make useful compost for mixing into the soil within
about six months. Composting is all about turning your organic gar-
bage and waste into rich fertilizer, which helps keep the soil in your yard
healthy and landfills less full. Some people even use worms to help speed
up the process, a method called vermiposting. To find out more about
composting, see the Gardening merit badge pamphlet.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 25
.What Is Soil?
Homeowners and farmers must apply the proper fertilizers
for the plants they want to grow. For example, grass on lawns
usually needs a greater amount of nitrogen than other nutrients.
Soybeans, a crop plant that has the ability to take nitrogen from
the air and, with the help of certain bacteria, store it in little
nodules, or lumps, on its roots, will on most soils produce a
much greater yield if fertilized with phosphorus.
Rotating Crops
People learned long ago that rotating crops—growing different
crop plants in a planned sequence—was important in good soil
management. Crop rotation has many benefits. Insects cannot
stay in the same field to dine on their favorite crop year after
year when crops are rotated. On many soils, it is easier to
maintain a good soil structure when shallow-rooted and deep-
rooted plants are alternated. On sloping land, erosion can be
greatly reduced by rotating crops.
“Sweet” or
“Sour” Soil?
You may hear
gardeners or
farmers remark
that they have
a “sweet” or a
“sour” soil. This
has nothing to
do with taste.
“Sour” is used
to describe a soil
that is acidic,
while “sweet”
refers to an
alkaline soil.
On the pH test scale, the number zero represents
an extremely strong acid reaction, 14 represents an
extremely strong alkaline reaction, and 7 represents
a neutral reaction. This information tells landowners
what will grow best in the soil and how to increase or
decrease its acidity.
Very few plants will grow in soils with a pH higher
than 10 or less than 3.5. Roses, most annual flowers
and vegetables, and most lawn grasses should have a
slightly acid to neutral soil. Farm crops thrive best in
soils ranging from pH 6.0 to 8.0.
A soils expert tests a soil core to determine its pH—how
acidic or alkaline it is.





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 27
.How Water Behaves
How Water Behaves
Of all the natural resources necessary to the existence and
comfort of all living things on Earth, water is the best-known.
We know that water falls on Earth as rain, snow, sleet, or hail.
But there are many things you might not know about water.
To understand more about water, we must learn about the
water cycle, or hydrologic cycle, the process by which water
travels from the sea through the air by means of clouds, and
falls on Earth to return again over the surface or underground
to the sea and start the cycle all over again.
We must manage the land to manage water. If we are to
manage land and water intelligently, we need to know how and
why water behaves the way it does.
The water cycle
CLOUD
FORMATION
PRECIPITATION (RAIN)
TRANSPIRATION
EVAPORATION
GROUNDWATER
PERCOLATION (SOAK-IN)
SURFACE RUNOFF
STREAM TO OCEAN


28 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
How Water Behaves.
The Hydrologic Cycle
Let’s begin with the sea, where the sun’s energy draws up
into the atmosphere most of the water that travels through the
hydrologic cycle. This process is known as evaporation.
Much of the moisture evaporated into the air soon falls
back into the sea during storms, but winds eventually do carry
air masses with moisture in them over land. A small part of the
moisture, or water vapor, in the air at any time might be visible
to us as clouds, fog, or mist. When the water vapor in clouds
condenses, we get the rain, snow, sleet, or hail that falls on
Earth—called precipitation.
As air masses move across the land, the air picks up more
moisture. Water from lakes, ponds, rivers, and even from
birdbaths and puddles on the sidewalk, evaporates and returns
moisture to the air. The soil itself gives up moisture as winds
move across it.
Another way moisture gets into the air is from living
plants. Moisture absorbed largely by plant roots from the soil
and other plant parts from the atmosphere moves into the air
during the plant’s life. This release of water vapor from plants
is called transpiration.
Different plants transpire greatly different amounts of water
depending on factors such as humidity, moisture, temperature,
and wind. A large oak or other hardwood tree, for example, can
transpire 500 gallons of water in a day. In dry country, where
moisture for growing crops and for other purposes is badly
needed, plants that are not considered useful but that transpire
large quantities of water sometimes must be removed to
conserve severely limited water.
Evaporation is one
of nature’s ways
of purifying water,
because most of
the dissolved
substances in it,
such as the salt in
seawater, remain
behind when
water evaporates.
Chemical reactions
return small
amounts of water
to the atmosphere.
People, animals,
and plants return
some through
the process
of respiration
(breathing), and
the combustion, or
burning, of fuels in
cars and furnaces
returns additional
amounts.
To see transpiration happening for yourself, try this
experiment. Place an airtight, transparent plastic bag
over a common potted houseplant and tie it fairly
tightly around the plant stem near the surface of the
soil. Then set the plant in the sunlight. Soon you will
see drops of water collecting on the inside of the
plastic bag.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 29
.How Water Behaves
Evaporation and Precipitation in Balance
Evaporation and precipitation are the most significant processes
in the endless hydrologic cycle that is always at work over
Earth’s entire surface. The amount of moisture in circulation
has remained about the same throughout the ages. The 95,000
cubic miles of water in circulation in the hydrologic cycle today
probably is about the same as it was in ancient times.
If all the world’s precipitation on land were evenly distrib-
uted, about 26 inches of moisture would fall annually on all
land. But precipitation is not evenly distributed. Some places
get less than an inch and others more than 400 inches. Average
annual precipitation in the United States is about 30 inches. In
the arid West, there is very little rain—probably 4 to 8 inches in a
year. And along the Cascade Range of mountains in Oregon and
Washington, about 100 inches of rain and snow fall each year.
To get some idea of the quantities of water involved in
the cycle, pretend that an ordinary bathtub filled to the
top represents all the water in the oceans. Compared
with that, the amount of water circulating in the
hydrologic cycle would fill an ordinary water glass
about two-thirds full.
Precipitation maps like this one of the Pacific Northwest show the
area’s average precipitation.
AVERAGE ANNUAL PRECIPITATION,
PACIFIC NORTHWEST, 1961–1990
LEGEND (INCHES)


30 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
How Water Behaves.
Water and Soil Working Together
Infiltration and Percolation
On Earth, precipitated water either soaks into the land or runs
off over the surface and is called runoff. To satisfy their many
wants and needs, people must control the water that falls on
the land. This means using and managing the land so that in
most cases the maximum amount of moisture enters the soil.
We can do our part to help water more readily enter the soil by
keeping plant cover on the ground, slowing runoff, maintaining
or increasing organic matter in the soil, maintaining good
soil structure, and by using other conservation practices.
After penetrating soil that is already wet, water
may continue moving downward through the soil
by percolation. Percolation, the major means by
which groundwater supplies are replenished,
is important, for many cities obtain all their
water from wells. In many places, water for
irrigating crops also is pumped from deep in
Earth.
In nature, there may be a layer of rock
or of hard soil through which water passes
slowly or not at all. If this layer is not far
from the surface, it may keep water from per-
colating deep into Earth, thereby limiting the
space for water storage in the soil.
The entry of water
into the soil is
called infiltration,
and the rate at
which water
penetrates the
surface of
the soil is the
infiltration rate.
According to the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), from
1950 to 2015 the U.S. population increased from 150
million to 325 million, a 116% increase. In this same
period, the total water withdrawals per day increased
from 180 billion gallons to 322 billion gallons, only a
79% increase. This is encouraging data showing the
water withdrawal per person is decreasing. The effect
of conservation can be shown between 2005 and
2015. Water usage peaked in 2005 with a daily with-
drawal of 410 billion gallons and a population of 300
million. From 2005 to 2015 the population increased
8% while water withdrawal decreased 21%.
The percolation rate in this soil was so slow that
outflow from a septic tank system rose to the
surface instead of draining away underground.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 31
.How Water Behaves
The percolation rate is important to those who need to
know how fast the soil absorbs water. For example, a septic
tank system for the disposal of household wastes won’t function
if water cannot percolate through the soil fast enough. People
who irrigate gardens and crops partially determine the amount
of water they need on the basis of how quickly the soil absorbs
water. Water that percolates through the soil might carry certain
impurities, such as chemicals and bacteria, so those who get
water from shallow wells need to know how fast and from what
sources water percolates underground.
Capillary Action
Another form of water movement in the soil is capillary action.
In this process, water moves in all directions. After rain has perco-
lated through soil, a thin film of water that clings to soil particles
and remains in tiny soil pores helps dissolve plant nutrients so
that plants can use them. This capillary action is the source from
which the fine hairs on plant roots absorb water.
Not all water that
enters the soil
percolates
through it. Some
becomes part of
the soil itself
though chemical
and physical
action as it soaks
into clay and silt
particles and the
pieces of decayed
and decaying
organic matter
we call humus.
To demonstrate capillary
action, get a flat pan and
fill it with an inch of water.
In it, place a clay pot filled
with a common houseplant
growing in soil that has
been allowed to become
quite dry. Within a few
hours you will see that the
surface of the soil in the pot
is moist. By capillary action,
water has risen through the
soil in the pot.
Water percolates through different soils at different
rates. To illustrate this, put sand in a small flowerpot
that has a hole in the bottom. Pack clay soil in an iden-
tical pot. Then pour water into each pot until it flows
through the sand and clay and out the bottom. Notice
the difference in the length of time it takes for water to
begin to trickle through the bottom of each pot.


32 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
How Water Behaves.
It could take capillary action several weeks to move water
upward in dry soil only about 3 feet. Once dryness breaks the
film of capillary moisture on soil particles, water cannot move
by capillary action again until the moisture supply is renewed
and the film reestablished. Since this takes time, capillary
action might not move water available after a long dry period
to the plant roots soon enough to save wilting plants.
The Water Table
Soil that is too wet can be as damaging to plants as soil that
is too dry. In some places, a major problem is moving water
off the land so that it will not settle there to waterlog the
soil, thereby cutting off the air to plant roots and to small soil
organisms that need oxygen. When the water table—the level
below which the soil is filled completely with water—is only a
few inches below the soil surface, the growth of plant roots is
restricted and many plants cannot grow. Where the water table
frequently rises to within a few feet of the surface, water can
seep into basements. When some soils become much wetter
than usual, they slip and settle, cracking plaster and shifting
building foundations.
Because people need a fairly constant supply of water for
many different uses, dams and reservoirs are built to control
and store water from the melting snows for later use.
But snowfall varies from year to year, and the storage
capacity of reservoirs is limited. To plan wisely for the stream-
flow they can expect, people use information from snow
surveys, which measure snowfall. From that, and other
factors, they can predict the streamflow for the coming season.
Those who manage reservoirs that store floodwaters can release
enough water from the reservoirs early to make room for the
water from rapidly melting snow upstream, and thus control
a flood.
When they know they will have less water than usual:
• Cities can limit water use early in the season and perhaps
avoid water rationing.
• Farmers can plan to plant fewer acres of water-thirsty
crops and thus avoid having crops on some acres die for
lack of water.
• Hydroelectric plant operators can plan to use other power
sources to produce electricity.
The runoff that
collects in creeks
and streams and
eventually flows
from rivers into
lakes and
reservoirs is the
source of most
of the water we
use. It is also the
source of nearly
all water that
wildlife uses.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 33
.How Water Behaves
Forecasting the flow of rivers and streams is important every-
where. However, it is difficult to predict because rain runs off
the land soon after it falls, and we do not know how much
rain will fall. Still, rainfall, streamflow, and groundwater records
accumulated over the years help experts determine the expected
flow from larger streams and rivers. These records also help
forecasters predict accurately the possibility of flooding
downstream caused by heavy and widespread rainfall many
miles upstream.
Rainfall determines the amount of streamflow in
most parts of our nation, except for the West, where
the winter snows in mountainous regions are the
great reservoirs of water that determine the volume
of streamflow.
During a typical snow season, from January to June, surveyors
travel more than 50,000 miles to measure the depth of the snow
to help determine the snow’s water content and the amount of
moisture in the soil below the snow.
The water that
comes from
melting snow is
vital to plants,
people, and
wildlife that live
hundreds of miles
away in dry
country where
little rain falls.





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 35
.Causes and Effects of Erosion
Causes and Effects
of Erosion
You have watched the force of moving water from a hose or
hydrant push dirt—even pebbles and rocks—off a driveway or
sidewalk. Rain and running water act on the bare soil in a
garden, on the site where a new building is being constructed,
in a farmer’s field, or on a cutbank along a highway in the
same way as the stream from a hose. The process by which
beating rain and moving water dislodge and carry soil particles,
organic matter, and plant nutrients to a new location is called
soil erosion by water.
Wherever you live, you have seen the wind pick up and
carry dust and larger particles of loose materials from
one place to another. You may have observed that there
usually is more dust and dirt in the air when it hasn’t
rained for a long time. Where does the wind best pick
up and deposit dust, dirt, and sand particles? Close to
trees or buildings, or out in open streets and spaces?
Huge clouds of blowing soil during the “dust bowl” days of the
1930s were called “rollers.”
Soil erosion by
water can occur
where and when
there is enough
rain or melting
snow and ice
so that water
quickly runs off
the surface of
the land.


36 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Causes and Effects of Erosion.
Whenever wind moves across a bare or poorly covered
soil surface, especially if the land is dry and the soil contains
mostly fine and loose particles, soil blowing, or soil erosion by
wind, occurs. Severe wind erosion occurred in the Great Plains
region in the 1930s. Then, the wind carried dense clouds of sur-
face soil more than 1,500 miles east to the Atlantic coast. The
drought broke in 1938, when life-giving rain returned.
Geologic Erosion
Natural, or geologic, erosion began when the air first stirred
and the rain first fell on Earth. It continues today and is espe-
cially noticeable in dry regions where there is little vegetation,
and infrequent but intense rains carve hills and scour valleys.
Geologic erosion usually moves so slowly that, when there is
much native plant cover, soil is built up and seldom destroyed,
and in a lifetime one could scarcely see the change it brings.
Throughout the ages, geologic erosion has shaped Earth’s face; it helped
crumble rocks to form soils, and it wore away mountains to make broad
plains and valleys.
CUT BY WATER WEATHERED SANDSTONEGLACIATED
Natural erosion


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 37
.Causes and Effects of Erosion
Accelerated Erosion and Sediment
Our concern is the accelerated erosion of soil that results from
human activities. Soil and water conservation projects help
control the rate of this kind of soil erosion, which some call the
greatest scourge the world has ever known. It affects everyone.
You may have seen a muddy creek or river. You don’t want
to play in it and you certainly don’t want to drink from it. In
many small streams, sediment fills the deep pools that provide a
refuge for fish during the dry season. Sediment often damages the
spawning beds of game fish, ruins their eggs, and reduces their
food supply. Fish eat the worms, insect larva, and other small
aquatic animals that feed on microscopic plants in the water—but
muddy water filters out light and so interferes with the growth of
microscopic plants. It has caused oysters to disappear from the
Chesapeake Bay, affecting commercial fisheries.
When flood-prevention and other types of reservoirs are built, allowance
must be made for the sedimentation. Each year, more than half a billion
cubic yards of sediment must be dredged from harbors and other navi-
gation channels in order to keep these vital water transportation routes
working. Much of the cost for removal is passed on to taxpayers.
DAMAGE FROM FLOODING EROSION FROM POOR
FARMING METHODS
GULLY EROSION FROM
UNCONTROLLED RUNOFF
Accelerated erosion


38 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Causes and Effects of Erosion.
Sediment removal makes water purification much more
expensive for many cities and towns. As a result, water bills go
up. Sediment in water also causes costly wear on machines, as
in hydroelectric plants.
Even more important and costly is the sediment that fills
lakes, reservoirs, navigation channels, harbors, and roadside
ditches. Reservoirs lose storage capacity each year as a result of
sediment. Eventually, the sediment must be removed or a new
reservoir constructed. Some city water reservoirs have been filled
completely with sediment in fewer than 30 years.
Each year, more rivers flood because sediment chokes
stream channels. In addition to floodwater damage, sediment
can damage streets, houses, automobiles, parks, camps, and
machinery. Much of this sediment has to be removed by
hand. Rain and wind also spread sediment over cropland,
destroying crops and making the soil less useful for growing
plants. Drainage and irrigation ditches become less effective
as they are clogged with sediment. Thus, sediment reduces
the amount and quality of crops.
Now you can understand how polluting sediment affects
everyone in some way. Because all sediment stems from erosion,
which destroys the usefulness of the land, we need to know
more about how erosion occurs, how to recognize it as it starts,
and what to do about it.
In large amounts, such as caused by accelerated erosion,
sediment can be a pollutant and create costly problems.
This small reservoir is rapidly becoming filled by sediment.
Sediment is
caused by soil
particles that
are moved and
deposited by
wind, water,
or glaciers.
Sedimentation
can quickly cause
small ponds to
become nothing
more than mud
holes; some ponds
have filled with
sediment in only a
couple of years.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 39
.Causes and Effects of Erosion
Soil Erosion by Water
The force of a single raindrop won’t move much soil. But when
billions of raindrops together hammer against bare ground, they
tear clumps of soil apart and separate the tiny particles from
each other. As they bounce into the air after striking the ground,
the raindrops carry some soil particles with them; these bits of
soil gradually move downhill. This is called splash erosion.
Whenever rain falls or snow melts so fast that the water
cannot soak into the soil, a sheet of water collects on the surface
and moves downhill. On sloping land with little vegetation, such
as a new building site, an overgrazed pasture, or a newly plowed
field, the combined action of beating raindrops and flowing
water continuously washes away thin layers of surface soil. This
is called sheet erosion. The damage caused by sheet erosion often
is not apparent until much of the surface is washed away.
As water moves over the land surface, collects in little
streams, and continues to run down a slope, it tears away more
soil particles until it carves small, irregular channels called rills.
Called rill erosion, it can be erased by smoothing over the land
surface as a farmer does when cultivating, yet the soil is gone.
After a rain, you
can see evidence
of splash erosion
in the small bits of
soil that cling to
the walls of
buildings, the
leaves of plants,
and picket fences.
Sheet erosion
is happening
wherever muddy
water moves off
bare ground
without cutting
channels in
the soil.
Three kinds of soil erosion by water: sheet erosion (top), gully
erosion (left), and rill erosion (right).


40 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Causes and Effects of Erosion.
Gullies leave
gaping channels
in the land, feed
huge amounts
of sediment into
creeks and
reservoirs, divide
fields into areas
too small to be
useful, and cut
deep scars into
steeply sloping
land where new
buildings are
being erected.
Wind erosion
On much sloping land, the small rills join somewhere
on the slope to make larger channels. As more water collects
in these channels, its force is increased; it begins to rip away
larger and larger pieces of soil. When water falls over a sudden
drop, it begins to cut into the slope itself. When larger channels
form, there is gully erosion. It takes more than ordinary cultiva-
tion to fill in gullies, for they are so deep that machines usually
cannot cross them. These destructive gullies often are a sign that
sheet and rill erosion have been going on for a long time.
Soil Erosion by Wind
The sand dunes we see in some desert areas and near the
shores of some lakes and oceans are obviously results of wind
erosion. The wind-shifted sands of these dunes are hard to con-
trol. Because plants cannot easily be established there, the sand
often continues to advance and cover even larger areas. Much
more serious wind erosion occurs, however, wherever loose,
small soil particles are moved by the wind.
Soil blowing usually starts on land that has few plants and
sandy soils. Once soil blowing starts, it tends to spread. The
wind picks up a few loose soil particles, and when these strike
bare ground, they blast loose other particles that in turn are
bounced and swept along the ground surface, causing further
erosion. The blowing soil particles can cut off tender, growing
plants at the ground surface. Or they can cover both growing
and dead vegetation with drifts and mounds of dust or sand.
When the growing plants are cut off, the soil they protected from
the wind will erode. If high winds continue for a long time, the
soil blowing can spread over an entire community.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 41
.Causes and Effects of Erosion
Erosion, Plants, and People
Why hasn’t all the soil been splashed, washed, and blown away
by this time? You can discover the answer to this question.
Have you ever seen dust blowing from a lawn that has a thick
grass cover? Have you ever seen mud splash up after a rain
from soil covered with grass? The grass broke the force of the
falling water, and its roots held the soil tightly in place.
In the same way, plants break the force of falling raindrops.
Their roots help water enter the soil by keeping it porous. They
hold the soil particles together so that moving water cannot
break the particles apart and carry them away. Plants also slow
down running water, thereby allowing some time for it to soak
in. Plants growing closely together protect the soil from strong
winds. The tops of the plants slow down the wind, and the
roots help hold the soil in place.
If we are to continue to live and to enjoy life on Earth,
we must conserve the land.
Though a natural
disaster can
remove all the
plants from an
area and expose
the surface soil
to the ravages of
wind and rain,
the area affected
is very small
compared with
the area people
have carelessly
used and left
unprotected.
Some call soil erosion a disease of civilization because
nearly all of it is the result of human activities:
• Cutting down forests and making no plans for
new growth
• Growing crops and leaving the soil bare for too long
• Leaving the soil unprotected during construction
• Overgrazing, thereby killing the vegetation
• Building highways and railroads without protecting
their banks
• Crowding wildlife so that they destroy the vegetation
in their search for food
• Trampling the grass and other plants to death in
recreational areas
• Destroying vegetation through careless use of fire
• Stripping the land surface to obtain fuels and
minerals from the earth
• Using the soil improperly for any purpose


42 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Causes and Effects of Erosion.
Problems of Runoff
When erosion reduces the depth of the surface soil, runoff
generally increases. When runoff increases, soil erodes more
rapidly, accelerating the cycle. But plants help soil absorb water
and protect the surface soil from the erosive action of water.
When we use, remove, or change the kind of plants on the
land, we usually change the quantity and quality of runoff. For
example, if trees and grass are cleared from an area for housing,
we know that more water will run off the land more quickly
and the runoff will be muddy. After the houses are built, the
streets are paved and community facilities are erected, much
of the soil on the area that was cleared is covered with hard
surfaces. Runoff from this built-up area can be as much as
10 times greater and will occur much more quickly than when
the land was covered with trees and grass.
Polluted Runoff
Water running off the land picks up many pollutants as it
moves. This is a main source of what is called nonpoint
source pollution (NPS); that is, the pollution doesn’t
come from a specific source, such as an industrial site
or sewage-treatment plant. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency points to several pollutants:
• Excess use of fertilizers, herbicides, and insecticides
• Oil, grease, and toxic chemicals that run off through
our cities and from energy production
• Bacteria from livestock manure, pet wastes, and
faulty septic systems
• Salt from irrigation practices and acid drainage from
abandoned mines
The EPA points out that “each of us can contribute to
the problem without even realizing it.” But each of us
can, and must, help combat pollution, too. Federal,
state, and local agencies must work with individuals to
prevent or minimize this kind of pollution.
— Source: epa.gov
Soil erosion is
commonplace on
developing lands.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 43
.Causes and Effects of Erosion
Similarly, when overgrazing is allowed, the amount and
speed of runoff increase and erosion occurs much more readily
than when grazing is managed so that grass and other plants
remain healthy. Fire also can remove plant cover from the land
and expose bare soil to beating rains; then, muddy runoff flows
down slopes and fills streams and lakes with sediment. The
damage to a city’s water supply can be devastating.
Plant cover is important in controlling runoff, but in
many instances it is not possible to keep plants growing on
the land. Sometimes the surface of the land needs to be shaped
to guide and control runoff. Small dams and other types of
water-retarding structures often must be built to control runoff
so that the land and the water are not damaged.
Erosion in Urban Areas
We often think of erosion problems as most important on farms
and ranches, yet the greatest erosion problems occur when
land in or near cities is being shifted to use for homes, shop-
ping centers, and other urban purposes. Pay attention to signs
of conservation problems in your area—mud in nearby street
gutters, on sidewalks, or in a corner of your yard; bare spots in
lawns, on the schoolyard, or on sloping banks; a muddy creek
or river. Learning more about soil and water conservation will
help you become aware of some of the conservation problems
your community might face.





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 45
.Conservation on the Land
Conservation
on the Land
People are constantly changing the uses of land. There might
now be a building under construction on the vacant lot where
you played last year. Perhaps a roadway that cuts through hills
and fills in low places has been constructed. Changes in land
use probably are being made at your Scout camp each year.
Farmers, of course, rotate crops each year and, as they do so,
they can make great changes on the face of the landscape.
As areas become more populated and new houses, stores,
factories, and schools are needed, and as people change their
minds about what they want from the land, there will be more
and more shifts in land use. During changes in land use, the
soil often can be left unprotected and subject to damage by
water and wind, as you’ve read. Improper care of land can
result in costly and serious damage to soil and water resources.


46 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Conservation on the Land.
Conservation Practices
A conservation practice is any specific action or process to care
for natural resources so they are protected from damage and
improved for certain uses. In some instances, a good conserva-
tion practice might be complete elimination of someone’s use
of a piece of land, leaving it just for scenery and wildlife. Many
conservation practices help to furnish the things that all wildlife
must have—food, shelter, and water. Even in cities, an amazing
variety of wildlife could appear if these needs are provided for in
small areas.
Good conservation
practices are
properly designed,
carefully
implemented,
and tested.
You can now recognize many of the familiar signs of trouble that can be
traced to poor use of land and lack of proper conservation measures:
• Mud and silt on sidewalks and driveways after a rain
• Exposed tree roots where the soil has been washed away
• Roadside ditches filled with sediment
• Muddy water in a stream or river
• Caved-in stream banks
• Rills and channels on exposed road banks
• Bare soil where there once was grass on your campsite
• Small and large gullies scarring the face of the land
However, much land is wisely used, and conservation is practiced on
millions of acres in the countryside as well as in cities and suburbs.
Sure signs of conservation at work are the large, graceful, curving
strips of crops you can see on many farms. These winding ribbons
include the dark green of grasses and the gold of ripening grains.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 47
.Conservation on the Land
Professional conservationists have solved many conservation
problems. Some practices may be suitable only for application on
croplands, rangelands, or forestlands. Because plants are the great
protectors of land surfaces, most practices involve the use and
management of plants so that they can hold soil in place. When
we want to use land for such things as buildings, campsites, or
crops, we often have to use engineering to properly change the
shape of the land surface to use and control water. Vegetation and
engineering conservation practices often must be used together to
be effective.
Conservation
buffers help
prevent blowing
soil in windy areas,
reduce flooding,
and provide
wildlife habitat.
Conservation Buffers
Grassed waterways and windbreaks are two kinds of
conservation buffers (or buffer strips), a special prac-
tice encouraged by the U.S. Department of Agriculture
(USDA). Conservation buffers are small areas or strips
of land kept in permanent vegetation. These areas then
help control soil erosion and pollution by breaking up
and slowing the movement of runoff, sediment, and
other pollutants within fields and from field to field.
The USDA launched the National Conservation
Buffer Initiative in 1997. Through this initiative, public
and private agencies are working together to help
landowners create 2 million miles of conservation
buffers in the United States. To date, approximately
1.95 million km (1.21 million mi) of conservation buffers
have been installed via participating programs for a
total of 1.76 million ha/4.36 million acres.
— Sources: Natural Resources Conservation Service, NACD, 2002
Grassed contour buffer strips cover an entire field in Iowa.


48 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Conservation on the Land.
Working With Vegetation
Applying a thin layer of organic material on the land surface
to hold surface soil in place while grass or other newly seeded
plants become established is called mulching. Often, mulching
is used on road banks, new lawns, the backside of earth dams,
and croplands where wind or water might erode soil.
Contour planting is when crops, fruit trees, and garden
plants are grown on sloping land, across the slope on the level
(where all places along a contour line are of equal elevation)—
rather than uphill and downhill. Contour planting reduces
erosion and is most effective with crops grown in rows. It is
used widely on farms and should be used in gardens or
wherever plants are cultivated on sloping land.
Strip-cropping is the growing of crops in broad or narrow
bands or strips across the general slope of a field or large garden.
Crops are arranged so that a strip of grass or other close-growing
crop is alternated with a strip of clean-tilled crop where some of
the soil surface is exposed. The close-growing crop slows runoff
from the clean-tilled strip. Strip cropping often is done on the
contour. Where soil blowing causes problems, the strips are
at angles to the direction of prevailing winds to help prevent
wind erosion.
Growing temporary crops of plants that cover the soil
between seasons or between rows of a main crop to protect
the soil from erosion is called cover cropping. It can be used
in gardens, on farms, and on construction sites where soil
might be exposed for a season before permanent vegetation
can be established.
Contour strip-cropping combines the
benefits of both contour planting and
strip-cropping.
Cover crop in a pear orchard


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 49
.Conservation on the Land
Stream banks can be protected against erosion and water-
scouring by using plants, rocks, or structural measures. Specific
methods include establishing certain types of grass after sloping
the banks, planting such trees as willows and alder below the
tops of the banks, or placing a thick layer of rocks or combina-
tion of wood, rock, and plants along the banks.
Planting, thinning, pruning, and properly harvesting
woodlands can provide enough growing space for good trees,
eliminate poor trees, establish stands of species best suited to
the soil and climate, maintain natural beauty, improve condi-
tions for wildlife, and maintain cover for erosion control. These
techniques also make it possible to obtain wood products with-
out damaging soil and water resources.
Working With Wind and Water
Trees and/or shrubs can be used as windbreaks to reduce the
effects of damaging winds. Windbreaks help control soil blowing
in fields; protect homes, other buildings, and delicate plants from
cold winter winds; reduce evaporation from soil; and trap snow
(necessary along farm fields, especially in the Great Plains). They
also add comfort and beauty to suburban homes and provide
food and homes for many kinds of wildlife.
Screens of trees,
shrubs, or vines
can be planted
to block views of
unsightly things
such as garbage
cans, junkyards,
and dumps; to
shield homes and
people from traffic
and other noises;
and otherwise to
beautify an area.
Stream bank protection
Tree and shrub windbreaks


50 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Conservation on the Land.
Terracing, or constructing ridges of earth, controls water
runoff in wet areas and conserves moisture in dry areas. The
ridges can be as low as a few inches or as high as 2 feet or
more. The distance between terraces must be designed so that
the runoff can flow to each terrace without overtopping it.
A grassed waterway is a natural or artificial drainage to
which runoff flows after a storm. Excess water can be channeled
from a field, garden, or other area to this permanent cover of
grass. The grass protects the channel from erosion and helps
keep sediment out of the water.
A constructed pool or basin formed by placing a dam or
barrier across a waterway at a suitable location to trap and
hold sediment is called a sediment basin. To guide runoff into
basins, contour diversions, or shallow ditches that follow the
contour on slopes, are sometimes used.
Terracing is
needed on sloping
soils in gardens,
around homes and
buildings, and on
cropped lands.
drop spillway.
A concrete, metal,
or wood structure
used to slow the
velocity of water
and control
gullying and
drop water to
a lower level.
Terracing
To be effective, a grassed waterway must be designed to carry
the volume of water it will receive.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 51
.Conservation on the Land
A pond, a reservoir of water made by building a dam or
embankment, could be as small as a few feet or as large as sev-
eral acres wide. Among its many useful purposes—fish pro-
duction, water for livestock and wildlife, recreation, fire
protection—it enhances the appearance of camps,
homes, and farms.
Floodwater-retarding structures are dams,
embankments, or other devices built to
provide temporary storage and controlled
release of floodwater.
Working With Wildlife
Wildlife habitat development is an important
part of conservation and includes planting
shrubs, trees, and many other kinds of
vegetation to furnish food, cover, and shelter for
wildlife; creating water supplies; making open-
ings in dense woods; limiting the use of an area;
and many other projects to attract and provide for the
needs of wildlife. Often these practices are a part of other
conservation work on farms, ranches, and around homes, in
parks, on school grounds, and in other open areas in cities.
Wildlife wetland developments improve or create habitats
by ditching, diking, or other means of providing appropriate
amounts of water, and by establishing plants to provide food,
cover, and shelter. This includes limiting other uses of the
wetland and maintaining the measures installed.
A sediment basin temporarily holds sediment on property where
construction is underway and in other places to keep sediment
and debris out of reservoirs, lakes, and streams.
Wetland
developments
can be used
wherever
enough water
and land are
available.





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 53
.Conservation in Watersheds
Conservation in
Watersheds
As rain falls on the land and makes its way back to the oceans,
it gathers in streams and rivers. The area of land from which
water runs off—your own backyard, a vacant lot, or just about
anywhere—and travels to a specific stream or outlet is called a
watershed. Wherever you live, you are in a watershed.
Hundreds of small watersheds with their little streams are
part of, and lie within, large watersheds that are drained by
rivers. A watershed boundary may not be obvious where the
land is nearly level, but in many places, the boundary
might be plainly marked by high ridges. Water that
flows one way from the ridge goes into one water-
shed, while water flowing off the other side of
the ridge goes into another watershed.
One way to determine the boundaries of
a watershed is to look at a topographic, or
contour, map. On such a map contour lines
represent a single elevation; all points along
a contour line are equal in elevation. If you
actually walked along such a line on the
land, you would always be walking on the
level, never going uphill or downhill. Since
water always runs downhill, you can locate on
the topographic map the areas of high ground
from which water drains in some kind of pattern
to a lower elevation.
Watersheds come in all sizes, from those not much big-
ger than a football field to those that contain millions
of acres of land and include several states, such as the
Mississippi River watershed.


54 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Conservation in Watersheds.
The Watershed Community
Geologist John Wesley Powell, emphasizing the web of nature,
defined a watershed as “that area of land … within which
all living things are inextricably linked by their common
water course.” These linked living things are the watershed
community—the animals, birds, plants, fish, and people who
live in a watershed.
Wildlife is part of the watershed community.
Your merit badge counselor can help you find a
topographic or contour map for your area. You might
be able to look at a map at the local office of most
government agencies that deal with areas of land—
the city or county engineer, planning commission,
Natural Resources Conservation Service, Forest Service,
National Park Service, Bureau of Land Management,
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, or your state geological
survey office. Also check your Scout camp’s library
for a topographic map of the camp property.
You may be able to obtain topographic maps from
a local sporting goods store or bookstore. You also can
find local dealers in your state at the U.S. Geological
Survey website, usgs.gov.
See the
Orienteering merit
badge pamphlet
for more on
topographic maps.ORIENTEERINGDIRECTION-OF-TRAVEL
ARROW
LINE UP THE MAGNETIC ARROW
AND ORIENTING ARROW.
READ
BEARING.
SKU 649767
STEM-Based


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 55
.Conservation in Watersheds
Runoff doesn’t stop at artificial boundaries such as
county lines, city limits, or the fence around your yard. All
the people, plants, and animals are affected by what happens
to the water and the land in the watershed; they depend on
the watershed and they influence what happens there. When
runoff from hundreds of small streams enters a larger stream,
flooding often occurs. In addition to slowing down runoff
from individual fields, yards, gardens, and parks, watershed
residents working together can build flood-prevention dams.
They also could advise people not to build homes, offices, and
factories on floodplains.
City and regional planners also explore ways to make living
safer and more comfortable for people while protecting soil and
water resources. They try to persuade local governments to set
aside floodplains for recreational areas, for open space, and for
other uses that cannot be greatly damaged by flooding.
Because land,
water, and other
resources are
so closely tied
together in a
watershed, the
most natural way
for people to solve
conservation
problems is by
working together.
When poorly or improperly treated waste is released into
streams from sewer systems or industry, or allowed to
run off carrying sediment and harmful materials into
streams, the polluted water is a problem for the entire
watershed community.
Because development and good use of a watershed
benefits many people, including those who live far
outside the watershed, the federal and state govern-
ments share with local people the cost of doing land
and water conservation work. This program of cooper-
ative work on watershed projects is carried out under
the Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act of
1954. In 1972, major amendments emphasized wider
environmental concerns, including conservation, use,
development, and disposal of water; and conservation
and use of land.


56 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Conservation in Watersheds.
Proper Use and Care of Land
Remember, the care and use of land in your watershed is impor-
tant to you. Fires that have swept through watersheds in the
western United States and have been followed by heavy and
prolonged rains have washed huge amounts of soil down
hillsides. In some places, mudslides have carried houses and
other buildings with it. Water supplies became polluted. Great
amounts of money and effort were spent to repair this damage
and to establish plants on the eroded slopes.
Local people must work together to protect their water-
sheds and the resources in them. Local, state, and federal
governments offer much help with organizing people to plan
and work together to control water and soil erosion. They also
help individual property owners.
In watershed projects, conservation measures to protect soil and
water resources—called land treatment—might include:
• Better methods of cutting and hauling out timber
• Applying mulch after seeding bare land on highway road banks
• Controlling grazing to keep grass and plants healthy
and growing
• Seeding land that has been cleared for construction,
overgrazed, or burned
• Constructing terraces and other means of controlling water,
and growing and cultivating crops on contours
• Planting trees to break the force of the wind
Watershed dams like this one help control runoff from streams
and hold and store sediment.
Careless logging,
overgrazing, and
construction work
that leaves large
areas of land bare
will increase
erosion, runoff,
sedimentation,
and possibly
flooding along
the streams
in the watershed.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 57
.Conservation in Watersheds
In most watershed projects, one or more small dams are
needed to hold back runoff temporarily. These dams usually
are designed to hold and store sediment as well as water.
In some cases it is necessary to build sediment traps. Other
multipurpose projects are applied in connection with many of
these reservoirs to improve wildlife and recreation values.
One vital aspect of a watershed is its aquifers, under-
ground storehouses for moving water. An aquifer is
composed of porous materials such as gravel, sand-
stone, and permeable rock. To access water found there,
humans can drill a well to reach the aquifer and remove
the water. Human activity on and near Earth’s surface
affects the health of the aqui-
fers below. For example, if
humans allow pesticides to
contaminate runoff, this
water can eventually pene-
trate the water table and
affect the water quality of
aquifers in the area. This is
why the health of the water-
shed and aquifers in your
community is so important.
Flood-prevention dams and reservoirs can be built larger to hold
water for recreation, industry, cities and towns, fish and wildlife,
and irrigation, which is what was done with this watershed project.


58 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Conservation in Watersheds.
River Basins
The more than 1 million square miles that is drained by the
Mississippi River is a large watershed. But this area is also called
a river basin, an area of land drained by a river and all its large
and small tributaries. All river basins are large watersheds, but
not all watersheds can be called river basins—some watersheds
are very small and their runoff is collected by a small stream.
Today, attention is being focused on river basins as areas for
large-scale planning, development, and conservation of
natural resources.
The continental United States has 18 major river basins; in each basin are combina-
tions of rural areas, industrial sites, and cities, and all depend on the water in that
basin because very little water moves between river basins.
The way people in cities along a river use water and
the kinds of wastes they put into the river will affect
industries, businesses, and cities farther downstream.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 59
.Conservation in Watersheds
Most rivers cross several political boundaries and many
types of terrain as they flow through different states on the
way to the ocean. The way that land and water are used and
managed in the small watersheds in the upper part of the river
basin affects the quality and quantity of water people in cities
downstream will have. So in dealing with the complex prob-
lems of natural resource use and population growth, attention
must be given to the needs of all the people in the river basin
because the river links them together.
In planning improvements for a watershed community,
many factors must be considered: flood control, hydroelectric
power, water supplies, sewage disposal, air and water pollution,
locations for homes and industry, open space and recreation
areas, fish and wildlife resources, land for crops and forests.
Though each state has its own problems, states must work
cooperatively to find intelligent solutions to water resource
problems. Several states now are working together on river-basin
commissions. With the federal government’s help, they are
surveying the community’s needs and making broad plans for
water and land resources in the entire basin.
The Mississippi River, which runs 2,340 miles long, is part of the Jefferson-Missouri-
Mississippi river system, North America’s largest.


60 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Conservation in Watersheds.
Desalination
Scientists and technicians are working hard to solve the problem
of water supply in areas of acute water shortage near the ocean
by making freshwater out of salty and brackish (slightly salty)
water. The process of removing salts from seawater is known as
desalinization, desalination, or desalting.
When water evaporates, salt and other substances are left
behind. If we catch and condense the water vapor from dirty or
salty water, we then have freshwater. This process, called distil-
lation, has long been used to obtain small amounts of freshwater
from seawater. But producing freshwater in large quantities by
evaporating seawater and catching and condensing the vapor is
expensive, even if the source of heat to cause evaporation—such
as from the sun—is free. Heating seawater by using fuel oil or
a nuclear reactor speeds up evaporation but adds to the cost of
producing freshwater.
Large seawater distillation plants operate in Kuwait,
Saudi Arabia, the Virgin Islands, Guantanamo Bay in
Cuba, Hong Kong, and Tijuana, Mexico.
A desalination plant, one of several on the island of Lanzarote, provides drinking
water for residents of the Canary Islands, off the west coast of Africa.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 61
.Conservation in Watersheds
Freezing is another method for treating seawater. When
salty water freezes, the ice crystals formed are pure. However,
when freezing is accelerated in machines, the crystals of ice
formed are coated with a thin film of salt water, which must
be washed from the crystals before they are melted. Thus, it is
difficult (and expensive) to get large amounts of freshwater by
this means.
Other desalination processes use membranes. One of these,
reverse osmosis, is used to treat brackish and slightly salty
water. Osmosis occurs when a diluted solution passes through
a membrane into a more concentrated solution, much as water
from the soil moves into plant roots through cell walls. This
process can be reversed if sufficient pressure is applied on
the concentrated or salty water side and freshwater will flow
through the membrane out of the salty water—hence the name
reverse osmosis.
The number of desalination plants is increasing steadily,
but the water is costly. However, cheaper and more efficient
processes for desalination are constantly being developed. This
is an exciting field for study and experimentation.
Another membrane process is electrodialysis, used
mostly for brackish waters. In this process electric
current is used instead of pressure. The current causes
the salt ions to move through the membranes, leaving
freshwater behind.





.Water Pollution
Water Pollution
In general, polluted water is water that contains anything
that makes it unfit for a specific purpose. Except for small
quantities used in science laboratories, all water contains
dissolved substances and suspended materials. Even the
safe, clean water most people drink is not absolutely pure.
In studying water pollution, we must learn how the quality
of water can be damaged by people (or in other ways) and
how to avoid or remedy this damage.
Water might look sparkling clean, but if it contains any
bacteria that cause disease, it is considered unfit for human
consumption. Yet, such water could be safely used for naviga-
tion. Water that is far too dirty for swimming might be perfectly
suitable for irrigating crops. Water that is so polluted by heat
that fish cannot live in it could
well be safe for birds to drink.
We see, then, that part of the
overall problem with water
pollution is deciding how safe
water must be or, in effect,
how much pollution we will
tolerate in water to be used for
different purposes.
Water is not
considered
polluted until the
kind or quantity
of material or
energy added to
it makes use of
the water less
healthful, useful,
or enjoyable.
Water is considered polluted when it contains anything—
such as bacteria, insecticides, oil, salt, toxic chemicals,
decaying vegetation, or litter—that makes it unfit for a
specific purpose.
SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 63


64 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Water Pollution.
Careful Planning Is Needed
If we are to have water of suitable quality for various uses, we
must plan carefully, learn to use water resources intelligently
while controlling pollution, and spend sizable sums of money to
clean up the damage already done to many of our water sources.
Broadscale planning for use of water resources and pollu-
tion control is difficult because the rain that falls on a water-
shed might travel in streams and rivers or underground through
several states and be used many times for different purposes.
Each city, each community, and each individual water user
must take responsibility for returning water to the rivers in
good condition and keeping pollutants out of it, so that the peo-
ple farther down the river will not have to clean up the water
for their use. In some cases, cleanup might not be possible,
and, of course, plants and wildlife suffer from dirty water.
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act amendments of
1972 (collectively, the Clean Water Act) established national
goals for clean water. Section 208 of the act generated two
major objectives: determining limitations to waste material
needed to meet water-quality standards, and developing state-
wide and areawide management plans for reducing pollution.
The problems of
water use and
pollution control
are a major focus
of river-basin
planning. Progress
is being made in
developing
water-quality
standards that
apply to waters
flowing across
state lines, but
pollution control
generally is still
a matter for action
through local
governments, for
they make many
of the laws that
govern water
use and sources
of pollution.
There are two basic sources of pollution—point and
nonpoint. Point source pollution has an identifiable
location from which the pollutants are coming, such
as an industrial or sewage-treatment plant. Nonpoint
source pollution has no single identifiable source and
is caused by runoff moving over, through, and into the
ground, picking up pollutants on the way. It usually
is associated with changes in land use, or land used
beyond its capabilities.


.Water Pollution
SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 65
Watershed Success Story
One of the great success stories of people working together to make
and keep our water clean and wildlife habitats healthy is that of the
Chesapeake Bay. The bay’s watershed covers about 64,000 square
miles and includes 150 rivers through parts of six states and the
District of Columbia. It is the nation’s largest estuary.
In the mid-1900s, people started noticing that the water
was becoming more and more polluted.
After Congress passed the Clean Air Act
and the Clean Water Act in the 1970s,
governmental support was in place
for citizens’ groups to start working
to save the bay. In 1983 the first
Chesapeake Bay Agreement was
signed, forming the Chesapeake
Bay Program. This is a partnership
among Maryland, Pennsylvania,
Virginia, the District of Columbia,
the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency, and the Chesapeake
Bay Commission.
The agreement has the goal of
restoring and maintaining the
bay through
• Restoring and protecting its living
resources, recognizing that “the entire
natural system must be healthy and productive”
• Reducing and controlling water pollution
• Planning for and managing the environmental effects of population
growth and development
• Promoting understanding through education and participation
• Promoting public access and appreciation
This joint effort shows how many groups of people have worked
together to help make our habitat healthy and accessible for
recreational and commercial use. You can learn more about the
Chesapeake Bay story at chesapeakebay.net.


66 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Water Pollution.
Major Pollutants
Scientists have specified eight general categories of water
pollutants: sediment, plant nutrients, infectious agents,
organic chemicals, sewage and organic wastes, salts and
mineral substances, radioactive substances, and thermal
(or heat) pollution.
Each kind of water pollutant is related to the use people
make of water resources, and in many cases, the use they make
of soil resources, too. The links between water and soil and the
web of nature make the problems of water pollution and its
control very complicated. Understanding the problems of water
use and some of the processes of water treatment is important,
for unless people understand the vital need for water-pollution
control, they will not be willing to pay for it.
Sediment
As we have seen, soil washed from its source and deposited
where it is not wanted is called sediment. It is estimated that
about half of the soil that erodes each year in the United States
reaches our rivers, streams, and lakes. About 1 billion tons of
soil is delivered to the oceans by rivers. The Mississippi
River alone dumps more than 500 million tons of
sediment into the Gulf of Mexico during an average
year; reservoirs trap another 1.3 billion tons.
Much of the sediment in surface waters
comes from erosion on poorly managed rural
lands, but a good deal comes from unprotected
areas in or near cities, such as urban con-
struction sites. Yields from undisturbed urban
lands are much lower, most of which come
from stream-channel erosion.
Control of erosion requires good soil and
water conservation practices—from the first
tiny trickle of water at the head of a stream to
the river’s end at the ocean. You can help solve
the problem of sediment pollution of water by
applying conservation practices so that your own
yard, school grounds, Scout camp, and other places
do not erode and add to the silt load of streams.
Sediment is a principal pollutant of surface waters.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 67
.Water Pollution
Plant Nutrients
The main plant nutrients that cause pollution problems (because
relatively large amounts of the nutrients get into surface waters)
are nitrogen, phosphorus, and potassium. At present, probably
the most damaging to water resources is phosphorus, which
comes from city sewage, detergents in wastewater, runoff from
land where much phosphorus fertilizer has been applied, and
natural sources.
Whatever the source, phosphorus often causes a great
increase in the growth rate and the quantity of algae in ponds,
lakes, and rivers. Like all plants, algae must have certain nutri-
ents. In most waters, the main factor that limits their growth is
a lack of phosphorus, so when additional amounts of it become
available, the blooms grow rapidly.
The solution to plant-nutrient pollution of water is effective
treatment of sewage—which contains much phosphorus from
detergents—and the proper use of soil conservation practices
to reduce runoff and delivery of sediment to streams from
fertilized fields, livestock feeding operations, and yards and
recreation areas.
The masses of algae that sometimes grow in a body of water are
known as algal blooms.
The growth of these plants in enormous quantities
crowds out other aquatic life. As decomposing organisms
go to work on dead algae, so much oxygen is used
from the water that little else can live, and the pond,
reservoir, or river becomes a mass of rotting algae.


68 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Water Pollution.
Infectious Agents
Microorganisms and bacteria
known as pathogens are the
leading pollutants of water
because they cause disease.
Before scientists learned how
diseases were carried from
place to place, many peo-
ple and animals got sick
as a result of swimming
in or drinking water
polluted by disease-
causing organisms.
Among the serious dis-
eases people might get
from drinking polluted
water are cholera, typhoid,
dysentery, hepatitis, leptospirosis,
and amebiasis. Several of these also affect animals.
Human and animal wastes, including those from birds and
other wild creatures, are the source of pathogens that enter the
water. Runoff can carry pathogens as it flows over the land to
a stream. Some disease-causing organisms can remain alive in
the soil for a long time and can move through the soil to under-
ground supplies for shallow wells. Periodic tests should be made
of all water for human use to make sure it is free of pathogens.
The effluent, or waste material, from sewage-treatment
plants may be treated with chlorine to kill pathogens. Most
cities treat their water supplies with chlorine before piping
it to homes and businesses.
The water in your
city swimming
pool is treated
with chlorine
to kill disease-
causing
organisms.
Another way
pathogens in
water can be
killed is by heat.
Generally, boil
water 20 minutes
to kill all
pathogens
effectively.
Because some chemical pollutants such as certain
pesticides are stored in animal fat, they can undergo
what is called biological magnification. This means that
the lowest link in a food chain, such as an insect, might
contain only a minute amount of the pesticide, but each
successive link will contain higher concentrations as
fish, birds, animals, or people eat the things that contain
these chemicals.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 69
.Water Pollution
Organic Chemicals
Many materials that pollute water are organic chemicals, such
as pesticides and herbicides, insecticides, fungicides, and petro-
leum derivatives. These and other chemicals enter the water by
being washed off the land. They usually move with soil parti-
cles carried by runoff—another important reason for controlling
erosion and runoff.
We must do everything possible to keep organic chemical
pollutants out of streams, rivers, and lakes. We should use the
proper chemicals for a specific purpose very carefully and devise
ways of preventing “accidents” through which the chemicals get
into water. These pollutants have led to many experiments with
wastewater treatment to find means of removal. Some industrial
plants are setting up new waste-disposal and waste-treatment
facilities to remove all chemical pollutants from wastewater.
Sewage and Organic Wastes
Sewage and organic wastes are highly significant pollutants
because of their large volume in the environment and the close
connection between them and other categories of pollutants. In
addition to the wastes that are carried by water from homes,
great quantities of organic wastes result from food-processing
and some industrial operations. Such wastes contain pathogens
and large amounts of plant nutrients. Untreated or inadequately
treated sewage and organic wastes often cause a body of water
to smell bad, and they can upset the natural biological balance
of a river or lake.
Accidents or
careless
discharges of
some materials
have resulted in
oil or deadly
poisons (such as
mercury) getting
into water and
greatly damaging
fish and wildlife
along seashores,
on inland lakes,
and in streams
and rivers.
A turbulent
stream will pick
up more oxygen
from the air than
a smooth-flowing,
quiet one.
Drainage from a nearby sewage treatment plant affects the water
quality of this small river.


70 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Water Pollution.
In a river or lake, aquatic plants, fish, insects, and billions of
different kinds of microorganisms work in harmony to maintain
a cycle of life that helps keep the water clean. The green plants
add to the oxygen in the water and a certain amount of oxygen
is picked up by the water from the air. Oxygen is vital to most
life in water. Fish need it to live, and great amounts of it are
required in the decomposition of the natural wastes of the river
such as sewage, dead plants, fish, and other organic matter.
Because decomposition organisms (that also require oxygen
to break down organic matter) multiply rapidly when there are
large amounts of material for them to live on, a stream can
quickly become overloaded with wastes and short on oxygen.
Depending on temperature and other factors, fish and
other forms of aquatic life will have enough oxygen
when the water contains 10 to 12 parts per mil-
lion of dissolved oxygen. When the dissolved
oxygen content drops below 3 to 5 parts per
million for a long period, fish suffocate and
the whole association of plants and animals
in the river or lake usually changes.
As cities became more populated and
more people used water for industries, the
volume of waste dumped into rivers and
lakes increased far more than what could
be processed naturally. The pollutants upset
the natural biological balance to such a degree
that some streams became little more than
open sewers. The fish could no longer survive,
and people downstream had difficulty treating the
water for use. Today, some communities continue to
dump untreated sewage into streams and lakes, and a
number of coastal cities pump raw sewage out into the ocean.
We call the amount of oxygen required to decompose
the organic matter present in water biochemical oxygen
demand, or BOD. Sewage and organic matter added to
water reduce its quality largely through their high BOD.
A body of water can handle a small amount of these
pollutants; natural processes break them down over
time and the water remains clean.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 71
.Water Pollution
Salts and Mineral Substances
Salts and mineral substances are troublesome pollutants in
many places in the United States. As water moves through the
soil and over the land, especially in dry parts of the country,
it picks up natural salts and minerals. Salt is a major irrigation
problem in the Southwest. Improved management of water
used for irrigation can help ease this problem.
Drainage from acid-mine waste is another example of this
type of pollutant, and it has severely damaged some streams
and rivers. Coal and other minerals are frequently mined by
using huge machines to strip away layers of soil and rock so
that the minerals can be scooped up and hauled away. This is
called strip mining. The waste materials from this type of min-
ing contain chemicals such as sulfur, which, when combined
with water from rain or snow, form strong acids. If enough of
this acid water gets into a creek or river, no aquatic plants or
animals can survive.
The Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of
1977 regulates strip mining and provides for the control
of erosion and drainage from acid-mine wastes. It takes
a little more time and money to use improved methods
of strip mining, but with these methods the mined land
can be made useful for other purposes, and pollution of
streams by minerals and acid can be controlled.
Drainage from
some irrigated
lands can contain
25 tons of salt per
acre-foot of water.


72 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Water Pollution.
Radioactive Substances
Radioactive substances are among the newest of water
pollutants. Even though the radiation from these substances
decreases (decays) with time, these pollutants are still dangerous
to humans and other forms of life. However, since we can’t
speed up the rate of decay, holding or putting radioactive
wastes in a safe place until they are no longer dangerous is
the only waste-treatment method. As the number of industrial
plants producing power from nuclear energy increases and
as the need for radioactive materials grows, disposal of these
toxic, radioactive wastes will become an even greater problem.
Liquid nuclear wastes range from low to high levels of
radioactivity. Treatment of radioactive wastes can involve
evaporating the water from them and fixing the solid wastes in
clay, ceramics, or cement, which then can be buried deep in the
earth or possibly the ocean.
Thermal Pollution
Thermal pollution, or raising the water temperature so that it
is less useful, is a growing problem. Many aquatic plants and
animals cannot survive for long in lakes and streams where
the water temperature is much higher than normal. When large
amounts of water are used for cooling purposes in industrial
processes, air conditioning, electric power production, and
other ways, the stream’s temperature can be raised to the point
where even plants cannot live.
Raising the water
temperature only
a few degrees
can make a big
difference in the
types of plants
and animals that
can grow in a
stream, river,
or lake.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 73
.Water Pollution
To help reduce thermal pollution in surface waters, some
industries are using methods such as cooling towers. Many
new industrial plants now have systems for recirculating water,
enabling them to use the water several times for different pur-
poses. By installing facilities for cleaning up and reusing water,
one chemical plant cut its daily water requirements from 130
million to 4 million gallons and reduced its costs for water.
Sewage Treatment
Because we want to continue to use water to move sewage and
organic wastes and still have relatively clean streams, rivers, and
lakes, we must do something to our huge quantities of sewage
and wastes so they will not pollute our water sources. This is
the purpose of sewage-treatment plants. Cities and towns usually
build and operate their own central sewage-treatment plants. In
addition to receiving the sewage from homes, hospitals, garages,
hotels, and other businesses, the plants often also serve some
industries. However, numerous industrial plants maintain their
own facilities for treating sewage before letting the water they’ve
used get back into the environment.
Many people today are concerned about the thermal pollution
caused by nuclear power plants. These plants use water to cool
the reactors, thereby heating the water. The easily recognizable
400- to 500-foot cooling towers at some nuclear plants help
remove heat from the water so that it can be discharged back
into the river or reused at the plant.


74 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Water Pollution.
Cities and towns generally are not building or expand-
ing sewage treatment plants fast enough to keep up with their
growing populations. Many cities and towns use sewage treat-
ment plants that were designed and built years ago, and these
are becoming overloaded. In many places, storm drains built to
handle the runoff from city streets flow into the sewer system.
After heavy rains, the sewage treatment plant cannot handle the
great amount of runoff. Some of this runoff flows directly into
rivers or lakes, carrying raw sewage along with it.
After sewage is collected in public sewers and brought to a
central point, it might receive primary treatment or primary and
secondary treatment. In a few instances, it might also receive
tertiary treatment. Each type of treatment calls for different
methods. The type of treatment used depends largely on the
strength and quantity of the sewage in relation to the nature
and volume of the water (river, stream, lake, reservoir) into
which the treated wastewater is discharged.
A basic method of treating municipal sewage
Original diagram from “Waste Not, Want Not,”
published by Wallace and Tiernan Inc.,
25 Main St., Belleville, NJ 07109.
TERTIARY
TREATMENT
CHLORINE
CONTACT
TANK
EFFLUENT
DISCHARGE
SLUDGE DRYING BED
SLUDGE DIGESTER
SECONDARY
SETTLING
TANK
TRICKLING
FILTER
(AERATION)
PUMP
PRIMARY
SETTLING
TANK
RAW SEWAGE
FROM SEWERS
BAR
SCREEN
GRIT
CHAMBER


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 75
.Water Pollution
Primary Treatment
Primary treatment of sewage mainly involves removing the
solids from wastewater. It is the only kind many towns use, but
there are different methods of accomplishing it. The first step in
primary treatment usually is some type of screen to trap sticks,
rags, and other large objects. The sewage might pass through a
grinder that chops these large objects into smaller pieces. Then,
the sewage moves slowly through a grit chamber where stones,
sand, and other heavy inorganic materials sink to the bottom
and are removed from the chamber. Next, the wastewater goes
to a settling tank where organic matter and fine particles of
other material settle and are collected, and scum and grease
float to the surface to be skimmed off. Certain chemicals can
be added to the settling tank to cause the fine particles to cling
together and settle faster.
The collected solids—sludge—from the bottom of the
settling tank go to a sludge chamber or digester where decom-
posing bacteria go to work on them. The digested sludge then
moves on to a drying bed, after which it can be burned, buried,
or used as fertilizer.
In primary treatment, the water left from the settling tank
is discharged into a river or stream or allowed to soak
into the land. Sometimes, as this fluid, called effluent,
flows out of the settling tank, it is treated with chlorine
to kill harmful bacteria.
Primary treatment


76 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Water Pollution.
Secondary Treatment
Often, the effluent resulting from primary treatment requires
secondary treatment. The wastewater repeats all the steps of
primary treatment and then one of two processes for further
organic waste decomposition. Both processes depend on
biological action and both require oxygen. The oxygen is
supplied through aeration, that is, by spraying the effluent
into the air or by pumping air into it.
In one process, the effluent goes from the primary settling
tank to a trickling filter. There, it passes slowly over stones or
other material where biological growths decompose the waste
left in the effluent. The stones and other material in the trickling
filter provide as much surface area as possible with oxygen so
that the biological growths can live and do their work. In the
other basic secondary process, effluent from the primary settling
tank goes into a sludge tank where activated sludge—material
that has various biological growths in it—completes the process
of decomposing organic materials. While the effluent remains
in the sludge tank, it is continuously aerated.
The effluent from either the trickling filter or the activated
sludge tank then goes to a secondary settling tank to allow
more waste materials to settle out. These materials go with the
sludge from the primary settling tank to the sludge chamber or
digester. As it flows from the secondary settling tank, the efflu-
ent is treated with chlorine before being released into a stream,
river, or lake or being allowed to soak into the ground.
Secondary treatment


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 77
.Water Pollution
Very little wastewater now receives tertiary treatment,
and there is no typical tertiary treatment plant. The
process used depends on the specific need for further
treatment of the effluent after it has received secondary
treatment. Tertiary treatment consists of slow or rapid
filtering of the effluent through sand to remove dis-
solved solids. This treatment could be aeration to foam
out detergents. It could be the use of chemical precipi-
tation to settle the solids. Or it could be superchlorina-
tion followed by dechlorination to kill harmful bacteria
and pathogens.
Tertiary Treatment
Even secondary treatment doesn’t get wastewater clean enough
in some situations. Tertiary treatment is used after the waste-
water goes through primary and secondary treatments. Tertiary
treatment gets the wastewater clean enough to be run through
a city’s water-treatment process for household use.
Properly treated wastewater is no longer water wasted.
It is good water and can be used again. Sewage treatment is
similar to nature’s endless chemical and physical water-
purifying processes. But nature’s methods take a long time
and simply cannot process the huge amounts of waste people
generate each day. Primary, secondary, and tertiary waste-
water treatment does the same thing nature does, only faster
and under controlled conditions.
Thousands of years ago when the ancient Romans built
storm-water sewers, mostly to help improve drainage
in their cities, they still dumped household waste on the
street. It wasn’t until the 1800s when people realized
that disposing of household waste in storm sewers and
gutters, where it was removed rapidly, could improve
community health—especially if those sewers were
underground. Sanitary sewage systems were expensive
to build, but by 1910, there were about 25,000 miles of
underground sewer lines in the United States.





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 79
.Conservation and Agriculture
Conservation and
Agriculture
Soil and water conservation practices help agriculturists
maximize their production while paying responsible attention
to the web of nature. This calls for attention to energy-
consumption needs.
Liquid fuel is used for tilling, harvesting, and other farming
operations, including the production and feeding of livestock.
Crop drying uses liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), natural gas,
and fuel oil. Petroleum energy also is used for irrigation, frost
protection, and greenhouse culture. Furthermore, the manu-
facture of agricultural supplies such as fertilizers, herbicides,
insecticides, and other chemicals uses great amounts of energy.
Other segments of the agribusiness industry, including trans-
portation, processing, manufacturing, and packaging, consume
vast amounts of energy.
The no-tillage
system is very
effective. Under
this system, seeds
are planted
directly through
the residue from
the previous crop.
Conservation tillage leaves residue from the past year’s crop
on the soil surface for protection from erosion.


80 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Conservation and Agriculture.
One potential for reducing fuel requirements in agriculture
is the use of conservation tillage, also called minimum tillage.
Tillage, such as plowing, prepares the soil for growing crops.
Conservation tillage limits the use of the plow because farmers
leave the residue of previous crops, such as stalks and leaves,
on the ground rather than plowing it under. Besides reducing
the number of trips across the field with large machinery,
thereby cutting fuel costs, conservation tillage also provides
excellent protection of the soil because the crop residue helps
control erosion of and conserve moisture in the soil.
Another potential for energy savings—and water conserva-
tion—in agriculture (and your own garden) lies in improved
irrigation. This can be done through drip irrigation, or water-
ing plants slowly and directly at their bases. The system uses
a series of main and lateral lines that run parallel to rows of
crops. These lines pipe water from a central source to drip at a
rate of 1 to 4 gallons per hour directly to the roots of individual
plants. It is not for every crop or every farmer, but drip irrigation
can provide great savings in energy and water.
Other conservation practices that could reduce agriculture’s
consumption of energy include increasing the use of animal
waste as fertilizers, building and planting parallel terraces, and
planting windbreaks. A carefully planned and researched pas-
ture management program usually helps reduce energy costs
and keeps pasturelands healthy and productive. To effectively
manage their lands, farmers and ranchers had to allow grazing
at the right time of year; avoid overgrazing or undergrazing pas-
tures; be attentive to and correct soil acidity when necessary;
fertilize responsibly; control undesirable plants; manage animal
waste; and rotate crops.
The development of alternative sources of energy will
continue to increase. Corn and other crops are being
grown to produce ethanol, which can be used as fuel.
Biodiesel is another renewable fuel that is produced
from crops and other agricultural materials.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 81
.Conservation and Agriculture
Agriculture research has expanded its alternative energy
sources. Work is underway on the use of biomass (biologi-
cal mass), or organic materials produced by plants and ani-
mals—such as wood chips, peanut shells, grass clippings, and
manure—to produce energy. Biomass energy has actually been
around for a long time. Even today, in some less-developed
countries, wood, crop residues, and dung remain major sources
of energy. Biomass is renewable, and the residues of biomass
benefit the land when returned to it. There are pros and cons
to the use of biomass, but many believe that it could make a
major contribution to energy savings in the future.
Agriculture researchers also pay attention to solar and
wind energy. Power derived from the sun offers prospects of
significantly reducing the amount of fossil fuel needed by agri-
culture for many tasks, including processing food, drying grains
and crops, heating livestock shelters, and heating and cooling
greenhouses. Other applications for both solar and wind energy
include operating irrigation pumps, supplying energy for rural
homes, and providing power for pumping water.
Solar power provides a cleaner energy source.





SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 83
.How You Can Help
How You Can Help
As you take a “conservation look” at your neighborhood, town,
or community, you will see many opportunities for conservation
projects and practices that will protect and improve soil and
water resources and at the same time add to the attractiveness
of areas.
If you need help in getting started on a project, don’t
hesitate to ask experts—soil conservationists, foresters, fish and
game managers, soil conservation district supervisors, teachers,
park commissioners, county agricultural agents, city and
regional planners, highway supervisors, or anyone else who
works with natural resources.
The conservation task you choose doesn’t need to be big.
Select a project that will give you a chance to apply some of the
basic conservation ideas you have learned in working for your
Soil and Water Conservation merit badge. (For more resources
on conservation go to scouting.org/outdoor-programs/
conservation-and-environment/conservation-resources.


84 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
How You Can Help.
Plan First
Plan before the work actually begins; it will help you organize
your thinking. Include the following in your planning:
• A description and map of the project area
• A definition and description of the problem that
needs attention
• An outline of steps to be taken to accomplish the task
• A list of the necessary tools and materials needed
• Notes on any follow-up or maintenance requirements
Be realistic about what you can and cannot do. It is better to
choose a small project that you can complete successfully than
to get involved in a large one that overwhelms you.
Ask yourself these questions:
• What factors of slope, climate, and soils need to be dealt with?
• What will be the appropriate grasses, shrubs, trees, or vines to
plant for the purposes you have in mind?
• Will the project harmonize with the soil and
water needs of the surrounding area?
• When is the best time to do the work?
• What care will be needed to keep
the project in useful condition after
it’s done?
You also will want to be sure your
plan includes normal safety precau-
tions for using tools, handling plant
materials, and conducting yourself
on hazardous terrain or near ponds
and streams.
Before you carry out your plan,
share it with your merit badge coun-
selor and discuss it together for more
ideas. This is a good way to get the kinks
out of your plan—and gain confidence, too.
Your counselor also can help you get the tools
and materials you will need.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 85
.How You Can Help
Ideas for Projects
Now for some specific project ideas. In most cases, you will
need to adapt these suggestions to your situation. Analyze
conservation tasks you can do around your home, at your Scout
camp, or within your neighborhood or community, and make
practical plans for carrying them out.
Plant Native Grasses and Other Ground Cover
Aim: Keep soil covered and hold it in place to control water
and wind erosion, reduce flooding and siltation, and beautify
an area.
You will find many places where you can practice conser-
vation by establishing a cover of grass, vines, or other plant-
ings. Check out schoolyards, wildlife areas, parks, roadside rest
areas, your place of worship, camping areas, and the grounds
around hospitals or other public buildings.
Most grasses can be planted using the same basic proce-
dure: First, learn something about the soils on the site, and find
out which grasses, combinations of grasses, or other plants will
grow best there. In some locations, you may need to add lime
to the soil as well as use fertilizers or organic material.


86 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
How You Can Help.
Spade or work the soil into a good seedbed, adding lime
and fertilizer if needed. Smooth and roll to a firm base and then
distribute the seeds. Rake the surface lightly, barely covering
the seeds. Sprinkle carefully with water to avoid disturbing soil
particles and washing away seeds. In some cases, you might
need to water the area periodically.
Especially useful on steep slopes are vining plants that
form excellent ground cover to help protect the soil. Many
of these will grow in shady areas where grass does not grow
well. Determine the kind of soil you have to work with and
the kinds of vining plants best suited to the location. Plant
them from the top of the slope downward. This way, you will
help check erosion at the top of the slope first and will avoid
trampling on plants as you add to the plantings farther down
the slope. Prepare the soil as for any planting by spading or
loosening it to the depth of a few inches. Work in lime or
fertilizer if needed. Most vining plants are started from small
plants rather than from seed.
Protect a Stream Bank
Aim: Repair and protect embankments subject to flooding and
erosion to reduce sedimentation and improve conditions
for fish and stream-side wildlife.
Choose an area that needs attention along
a small brook or creek. Leave the protection
of rivers banks to engineers and other
professionals. If the bank is steep and
undercut, use hand tools to reslope
it to a uniform, gentler grade. Find
out what plants, grasses, and seeds
would be suitable for bank stabiliza-
tion. Use several different kinds.
Sometimes a stream bank needs
more protection than planting; if the
current is swift or the bank is eroding
too fast for plants to get started, place
a layer of stones or broken rock at the
foot of the bank—extending a few feet
above the expected waterline.
You can also use the basic principles of
protecting a stream bank along the shores of
ponds and lakes.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 87
.How You Can Help
Plant Native Trees and Shrubs
Aim: Help hold the soil in place, provide shade, produce timber,
provide shelter and food for wildlife, and beautify an area.
Consider many factors before planting trees or shrubs,
including the kind of soil, how long the tree or shrub will likely
live, the size and shape of the tree when fully grown, the kind
to use for a specific purpose, and the care it will be given.
When you get the tree and shrub seedlings you will plant,
be sure to keep their roots completely in water, or in moist
organic material such as peat moss, until you actually plant
them in the ground. Dig planting holes spaced according to
local laws and recommendations for the kind of trees or shrubs
you are planting; usually these holes should be about 2 feet
apart in rows about 2 feet apart. It is important that the holes
you dig are large enough to hold all the roots without crowding
them. Be sure the soil at the bottom of the hole is not packed
so hard it will interfere with root growth. If the soil is dry,
you might need to put a little water in the hole. Press the soil
carefully and extra firmly about the roots as you fill the hole,
because air pockets in the root zone could kill the seedling.
Prevent weeds, grass, and other plants from growing up
around small seedlings. Of course, you may have to water the
seedlings regularly if there is little rain. Should the seedlings
need protection, pile a layer of brush over the planted area.
Drive stakes and use wire to tie down the matting of brush.
For large-scale tree-planting projects, you will need the
help and direction of experts who know about the best trees to
use for different purposes and the kinds of soils in which the
trees can be expected to grow.


88 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
How You Can Help.
Control Trail Erosion
Aim: Protect footpaths in camp areas, hiking and nature trails,
and primitive roads from damage caused by erosion and from
earth slides caused by heavy rains and melting snow.
In laying out new trails or dirt roads, avoid trouble by
locating them as nearly as possible on the contour. Other pre-
cautions in the layout and construction stages include making
lanes no wider than absolutely necessary and taking care not to
remove the natural cover of vegetation near the side of the trail.
Where trails go downhill and runoff could flow rapidly
and cut into the trail surface, you can use a conservation device
known as a water bar. This is made by cutting a shallow chan-
nel across the trail at an angle to the slope. A small log or stones
can then be placed in the channel. When water flows down the
trail, this bar serves as a small dam to divert water off the trail
and onto an area of grass where it can soak into the soil and
provide moisture for plants.
To ensure against erosion and make the trail less muddy
in wet weather and less dusty in dry weather, put a layer of
organic material—such as wood chips, sawdust, pine needles,
or leaves—on the trail surface.
Be sure to get the advice of a conservation specialist before
trying to control erosion. If you don’t design and carry out
erosion control practices properly, you could end up creating
more problems.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 89
.How You Can Help
Mulch Your Soil
Aim: Hold surface soil in place until newly seeded
plants become established, and shelter otherwise
bare soil from water-erosion damage.
Mulches check erosion by protecting
the surface soil from the action of water
and wind. They help keep the soil
surface from drying out and protect the
plant’s root zone from extreme cold or
heat. A heavy layer of mulch around
growing plants retards the growth of
weeds. When using mulches, nitrogen
usually must be added with them
over and above the usual amount
recommended for the soil.
Use a fork or spade to apply a mulch
wherever soils or young plants need protec-
tion. To keep light materials such as leaves
or straw from blowing away, push the edge of a
shovel or spade through the mulch into the surface
at close intervals to anchor the materials in the soil.
Build a Grass Waterway
Aim: Dispose of excess runoff safely, prevent soil loss and other
water damage, and help keep sediment out of water.
Grass waterways are needed on the sloping soils of gardens,
lawns, camps, playing fields, croplands, pastures, wildlife areas,
and many other places.
Note where water runs toward a lower area after a storm
and find a place where it can be disposed of safely. This could
be a street gutter, a stream, a patch of woods, or a small pond.
Starting from the lower end of the waterway, move soil to
create a wide, shallow channel where you want the water to
flow. Prepare a good seedbed in the shaped channel and then
seed recommended kinds of grass.
For quick cover during a rainy season, you might want
to seed some annual grasses or some quick-growing oats, rye,
or barley. Keep the waterway mowed and free of weeds and
brush; you also might have to treat it occasionally with lime
and fertilizer to keep the turf dense and tough. The liming and
fertilization rates should be a part of the property’s overall soil
and water conservation plan.


90 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
How You Can Help.
Educate Others
Aim: Help other people in your town or community to under-
stand the importance of conservation and the need for the
intelligent use and management of natural resources.
You can give talks and demonstrations on conservation
practices to your fellow Scouts and other groups. Describe a
planting project or stream-bank erosion control project, or talk
about how to make a compost pile. You could demonstrate,
with little equipment, how water runs off bare soil, soil with
a grass cover, and soil with a mulch on it.
Organize your talk around a central theme. Define a con-
servation problem and then give specific examples of conserva-
tion practices that have been or should be used to deal with it.
Tell briefly and clearly how we depend on soil, water, plants,
and animals for our survival, and explain how you are helping
in the important work of conservation—and how your listeners
can help, too.
You can make exhibits for science fairs or for display in
the windows of banks and stores, at county fairs, at airports, in
your school auditorium, at flower shows, at your Scout head-
quarters, or at the local library. Exhibits tell a story about local
conservation problems and how they are being solved.
Do a Conservation Inventory
Aim: Uncover and explore conservation needs in a selected area
within your community and direct the attention of people to
them so conservation practices can be applied.
Choose an area—perhaps a number of blocks in your
neighborhood, your Scout camp, or the entire town—and look
at its conservation needs. Here are some questions to ask your-
self as you make your conservation inventory and pinpoint on a
map the conservation problems you discover:
• Are the banks of rivers or smaller streams eroding?
• Can you see evidence of flooding? When did the last
flood occur?
• What flood-control measures or devices does your
community have?
• Where does your community or town get its water?
• How does your community treat its sewage?
• Are there ditches along the sidewalks where
grass once grew?


• What is the condition of slopes along highways?
• Do you see any litter baskets or barrels in your community?
Are they being used?
• Does your community have any shade trees? Are they
healthy? Who takes care of them?
• How many different kinds of birds and other wildlife live in
your neighborhood? Why do they live there?
• What is happening to vacant lots?
• Are there any junkyards in your community?
• Does your school have a conservation project?
Help Curb Invasive Species
Trees covered and weighted down with vines. Walls of nearly
solid green vegetation along roadways. Large areas of defoliated
trees and other plants. If you have seen any of these conditions,
you have witnessed the work of an invasive species—plants and
animals not native to an area. Their presence can harm the
environment and the species that already live there.
When nonnative, exotic plants and
animals are introduced into an ecosystem, they
often have no natural predators or controls
to keep them in check with the established
habitat. Such an environment allows them to
aggressively spread out and compete with native
species for food, water, shelter, and space, and to
expose these native species to new diseases and other
hazards. This is why invasive species are a major
threat to nature—and also to recreational areas such as
lakes and parks that we all enjoy.
You might wonder how you can help curb the
effects of invasive species. From seeds stuck on the soles
of shoes to snails and algae clinging to boats, remember that
people and human activity are the major transporters of invasive
species. Follow these commonsense tips when you are enjoying
the outdoors.
• After a hike, shake out your socks and remove any weeds
and seeds from your shoes before heading home.
• When you are through boating, inspect your equipment and
boat before leaving the site. You don’t want to transport any
plants, water, mud, leftover bait, or fish and other living
things to another area.
Over eons of time,
populations of plant
and animal species
develop complex
relationships in
balance with
nature. This
delicate balance
can easily be
destroyed when an
invasive species
enters the picture.


92 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
How You Can Help.
• If you have caught any fish, release it back only to the area
where it was caught. Never transport your catch and release
it somewhere else. In addition, never release anything from
your home aquarium to a lake, pond, or other body of water.
• If you are riding a bike, motorcycle, horse, or any other
transportation across long distances, be sure you don’t pick
up any “hitchhikers” along the way, such as seeds, plant
parts, and bugs.
Here are only a few examples of invasive species. You
might recognize them.
The purple loosestrife was first imported as a garden orna-
mental from Eurasia. It has now taken over vast areas of fresh-
water wetland habitats in North America. In some areas, there
has been limited success with using biological controls—
beetles and weevils imported from this plant’s native home-
land—to combat this pest. Because one plant can produce up to
2.7 million seeds per year, it has been an uphill battle to combat
the purple loosestrife.
Phragmites are a wild, cane-like plant that dominates
thousands of acres of coastal and interior wetlands. It spreads
readily, forming vast and dense reed beds that choke out native
plant species. The stalks and plumes of phragmites can grow to
around 14 feet high, making it even more difficult to control
and eliminate.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 93
.How You Can Help
The invasive island apple snail came from the aquarium
and aquaculture trades via South America. This agricultural
pest grows to about the size of a baseball, devours any type of
aquatic plant, has few natural enemies, and multiplies quickly.
In fact, one female island apple snail can lay up to 1,000 eggs
every 10 to 14 days.
The eerie looking snakehead fish escaped from the aquar-
ium pet trade and fish markets into local waterways, where it
has spread rapidly, eating up native fish and their eggs. During
droughts, snakeheads can actually wriggle over land on their
fins and body to reach other waterways. Outside their native
habitat, they have no known enemies.
Caterpillars of the devastating gypsy moth have been
responsible for defoliating millions of trees across North
America since its introduction here in the late 1860s. Since
1980, these hungry pests have destroyed tremendous areas of
wildlife habitat, recreational areas, suburbs, and forests. While
many different methods have been used to help control the
spread of the gypsy moth, none has successfully eradicated it.


94 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Resources.
Scouting Literature
Fieldbook; Animal Science, Architecture
and Landscape Architecture, Backpacking,
Environmental Science, Farm Mechanics,
Fish and Wildlife Management, Forestry,
Gardening, Mining in Society, Nature,
Oceanography, Orienteering, Plant Science,
and Sustainability merit badge pamphlets
Books About Conservation
Bramwell, Martyn. The Environment
and Conservation. Prentice
Hall, 1992.
Crawford, Leslie, and Cathy Anderson
(ed.). Water Conservation
(Environmental Action). Dale
Seymour Publications, 1997.
DeGalan, Julie, and Bryon Middlekauff.
Great Jobs for Environmental Studies
Majors, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, 2008.
de Villiers, Marq. Water: The Fate of
Our Most Precious Resource. Mariner
Books, 2001.
Doyle, Kevin, et al. The Complete Guide
to Environmental Careers in the 21st
Century. Island Press, 1998.
Feinstein, Stephen. Conserving and
Protecting Water: What You Can Do.
Enslow Publishers, 2010.
Fradkin, Philip L. A River No More:
The Colorado River and the West.
University of California Press, 1996.
Gardner, Robert. Soil: Green Science
Projects for a Sustainable Planet.
Enslow Publishers, 2014.
Greenland, Paul R. Career Opportunities
in Conservation and the
Environment. Ferguson, 2007.
Leinwand, Gerald. The Environment
(American Issues). Facts on
File, 1990.
Lucas, Eileen. Naturalists,
Conservationists, and
Environmentalists (American
Profiles). Facts on File, 1994.
———. Water: A Resource in Crisis.
Children’s Press, 1991.
Morgan, R.P.C. Soil Erosion and
Conservation, 3rd ed. Blackwell
Publishing, 2005.
Rothfeder, Jeffrey. Every Drop for Sale:
Our Desperate Battle Over Water
in a World About to Run Out.
Tarcher, 2004.
Stille, Darlene R. Soil: Digging into
Earth’s Vital Resource. Compass
Point Books, 2005.
Resources
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION 95
.Resources
Organizations and Websites
Chesapeake Bay Program
Toll-free telephone: 800-968-7229
chesapeakebay.net
EnviroLink Network
envirolink.org
Environmental Protection Agency
Ariel Rios Building
1200 Pennsylvania Ave., NW
Washington, DC 20460
Telephone: 202-272-0167
epa.gov/environmental-topics/
water-topics
Natural Resources
Conservation Service
Telephone: 202-720-3210
nrcs.usda.gov and
websoilsurvey.nrcs.usda.gov/app
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Gary M. Stolz,
Ph.D., U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service,
and the USDA Natural Resources
Conservation Service for their technical
expertise and guidance during the
revision of this merit badge pamphlet.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Scouting America thanks the follow-
ing for their help with previous editions
of this pamphlet, upon which this edi-
tion is based: Jerry Bernard, Ken Carter,
Bruce Dubee, Doug Holy, Tarleton A.
Jenkins, Walter E. Jeske, Ted Kupelian,
Katherine N. Mergen, Paul Reich, and
Robert F. Tegner of the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, U.S. Department of
Agriculture, with the counsel and techni-
cal assistance of other personnel of the
Natural Resources Conservation Service.
We also appreciate Ed Partington,
Environmental Protection Agency, for his
assistance.
Photo and Illustration Credits
©2000 Oregon State University/C. Daly, G.
Taylor, and J. Aiken, courtesy—page 29
Florida Department of Environmental
Protection/Dana Denson, courtesy—
page 93 (snail)
Ferenc Lakatos, University of West-
Hungary, Bugwood.org, courtesy—
page 93 (caterpillar)
Longhorn Council, Scouting America,
courtesy—page 53
NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
courtesy—page 52
Natural Resources Conservation Service,
courtesy—pages 20–21 (both), 25, 35,
40, and 50 (grassed waterway)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Lynn Betts, courtesy—cover (contour-
ing); pages 37 (flood erosion), 39
(sheet, gully, and rill erosion), 43, 47,
48 (contouring), 54 (duck), 56–57
(watershed dams), 67, and 79
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Kurt Blume, courtesy—page 51
(sediment basin)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Erwin C. Cole, courtesy—cover
(farm community)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Jim Fortner, courtesy—page 17
(soil profile)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Fred Gasper, courtesy—page 37
(farming erosion)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Gary Kramer, courtesy—pages 46 and
48 (orchard)


96 SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
Resources.
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Tim McCabe, courtesy—pages 11
(duck), 36 (sandstone), 38, 49 (wind-
breaks), 50 (terracing), and 51 (duck)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Bob Nichols, courtesy—page 19
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Ron Nichols, courtesy—page 33
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Charlie Rahm, courtesy—page 11
(conservationists)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Jeff Vanuga, courtesy—page 37
(gully erosion)
Natural Resources Conservation Service/
Gary Wilson, courtesy—page 49
(stream bank)
Texas Natural Resources Information
System, courtesy—page 30
USDA APHIS PPQ Archive, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 93 (gypsy moth)
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service/Bill
Buchanan, courtesy—page 92 (purple
loosestrife, phragmites)
U.S. Geological Survey, courtesy—
page 93 (fish)
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 65,
69, 75–76 (primary and secondary
treatments), and 87
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by ScoutingAmerica.
Tom Copeland—page 82
Daniel Giles—page 85
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 16–18, 27, 58, and 74