STAMP
COLLECTING


STAMP
COLLECTING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35955
ISBN 978-0-8395-3296-5
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


STAMP COLLECTING 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Stamp-Collecting or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.


4 STAMP COLLECTING


STAMP COLLECTING 5





STAMP COLLECTING 7
Contents
Introduction to Stamp Collecting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Types of Stamp Collecting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
The Language of Stamp Collecting . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 27
The Design and Production of Stamps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Displaying Your Collection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
Fun Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
The U.S. Postal Service From Past to Present . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Interesting Stories About Stamps . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Stamp Collecting Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73





STAMP COLLECTING 9
.Introduction to Stamp Collecting
Introduction to
Stamp Collecting
The world’s most popular hobby, stamp collecting is
enjoyed by millions throughout the world. It is known as
“the hobby of kings and kids.” Many lasting friendships
have begun as a result of stamp collecting.
Through this hobby you can experience history, from the
Pony Express to man’s first landing on the moon. You can meet
presidents from George Washington to Ronald Reagan. For most
countries, postage stamps are like tiny windows that introduce
the people of the world to the country’s leaders, customs,
history, products, and environment.
Many stamps honor famous people—statesmen,
educators, inventors, royalty, and leaders of various
movements or services. Others recognize the achievements
of organizations such as Scouting, the Red Cross, or 4-H,
and still others mark holidays such as Hanukkah,
Kwanzaa, and Easter.


10 STAMP COLLECTING
Introduction to Stamp Collecting.
Great art and artists are represented on stamps. A stamp is
a masterpiece of art in miniature. Every line, every hair must be
painstakingly carved on a metal die before an engraved stamp
is printed.
Some philatelists collect stamps from one or a few
countries—the United States or the former British
Commonwealth, for example. Others collect stamps from
all over the world. This type of collection is called a general
collection. Some general collectors collect stamps issued during
specific years or periods—from the time they were born to the
present, for example, or only those issued during World War II.
Topical collectors concentrate on what is shown on the
design of the stamp—outer space, historical figures, horses,
dogs, flowers, trains, sports or athletes, and so on.
The way you collect and what
you collect should be based upon
your personal interests. Collect what
you enjoy—and enjoy learning about
what you collect.
Philately is the
collection and
study of stamps
and other
postal materials.
A person who
collects and
studies stamps is
called a philatelist.


.Introduction to Stamp Collecting
Understanding
People, Places, and History
Over the decades since Great Britain issued the first adhesive
postage stamp, the Penny Black, in 1840, more than 700 geo-
graphical or political entities have issued stamps of their own.
As of 2021, more than 220 postal administrations around the
world continue to issue stamps. There are far too many stamps
for any one person to collect them all—so you need to concen-
trate your collection in some way.
Let’s begin by looking at the
many different possibilities a begin-
ning stamp collector can pursue. In
order to fulfill the requirements of this
merit badge, you must choose one or
two areas of concentration. You might
decide to concentrate on stamps
issued by the United States or stamps
issued by other countries.
The Penny Black
STAMP COLLECTING 11


12 STAMP COLLECTING
Introduction to Stamp Collecting.
United States Stamps
The United States Postal Service prints 13.7 billion stamps per
year. In 2020, the USPS produced 31 new postal issues that
included 105 separate designs (some issues involve numerous
different stamps). Among the subjects were prominent
Americans such as President Ronald Reagan, architectural
works, noted American scientists, tennis star Arthur Ashe, four
distinguished United States Marines, and the man behind the
Muppets, Jim Henson.
Stamps also commemorated key moments of the Civil
Rights movement and showcased spring flowers, constellations,
architecture, airplanes and jets, sporty cars of the 1950s,
and such Disney characters as Mickey Mouse, Ariel, the Mad
Hatter, and Snow White. The USPS also issued the Northeast
Deciduous Forest souvenir stamp sheet (with 10 separate stamp
designs). This was the seventh in its “Nature of America” series
that promotes appreciation of major plant and animal communi-
ties in the United States. (Meet the artist who painted the series
of stamp sheets in the chapter “The Design and Production of
Stamps.”) These are typical subjects for stamps—which honor
events, persons, and themes of widespread national appeal.
For more
information about
U.S. stamps,
visit the U.S.
Postal Service
website (with
your parent’s
permission) at
www.usps
.com, or check
out the Postal
Service Guide to
U.S. Stamps,
available at
many post offices
and bookstores.


STAMP COLLECTING 13
.Introduction to Stamp Collecting
To learn more about the stamps shown here, you can turn
to a stamp catalog. Take the Northeast Deciduous Forest stamp
sheet from the Nature of America series, for example. If a catalog
is not available at home, your local library should have a copy of
the Scott or Minkus catalogs, or the Postal Service Guide to U.S.
Stamps. From the catalog we learn that these stamps were issued
on March 3, 2005. The pane has 10 37-cent stamps depicting the
eastern buckmoth, red-shouldered hawk, eastern red bat, white-
tailed deer, black bear, long-tailed weasel, wild turkey, ovenbird,
red eft (a type of salamander), and eastern chipmunk.
These stamps were printed by a process known as photo-
gravure, in which the design of the stamp is photographed
through a fine screen. The screen breaks the design up into
tiny dots that are etched into a plate that holds the ink. The
ink is lifted onto stamp paper when it is pressed against the
plate. Other stamps are printed using lithography and offset
printing techniques.
Northeast Deciduous Forest stamp sheet
For more
information on
stamp printing
processes, see
the introduction
section of
the Scott
Standard Postage
Stamp Catalogue.


14 STAMP COLLECTING
Introduction to Stamp Collecting.
Stamps From Other Countries
You may want to collect a foreign country’s stamps because
you are interested in learning more about that country. Countries
often picture their own geographical and historical landmarks
on stamps. Some picture animals or birds native to their land.
Another reason people collect foreign stamps is that many
countries issue stamps about current popular culture, such as
movies, musicians, and celebrities. In October 2005, for exam-
ple, New Zealand issued stamps depicting the giant ape and
other characters from the movie “King Kong,” which was
filmed in that country and released in 2005. In January 2006,
the Austrian Postal Service issued a stamp commemorating still-
living American boxing legend Muhammad Ali. Also in January
2006, the Canada Post commemorated Queen Elizabeth II of
the United Kingdom. The image on the stamp came from a
photograph of the Queen taken during her visit to Canada in
2002. None of these subjects could have appeared on a U.S.
stamp before 2012.
Some countries have very little or no need for stamps in
their postal system and will print stamps—especially stamps
with high value—only for the income they produce. Sometimes
a stamp is purchased already canceled. These stamps are called
CTO, or canceled-to-order. Typically, CTOs have a very
neat cancellation that just touches one corner of the
stamp. When you turn the stamp over, you will find
that it still has its original gum on the back.
The U.S. Postal
Service has strict
rules about what
events or people
shall be shown on
stamps. Until 2012,
a living person or
someone who had
died less than five
years ago (except
for an American
president) could
not be shown on a
U.S. stamp.
CTO stamp


STAMP COLLECTING 15
Friendships Around the World
Making friends doesn’t have to happen in your own neighborhood.
Make new and lasting friendships by finding a pen pal. Having a pen
pal—someone you may never meet in person but whom you become
friends with by exchanging letters—is a fun learning experience.
Aside from getting envelopes with interesting stamps and postmarks,
you could exchange stamps and get to know someone. You might also
learn about a foreign language or another culture.
Imagine having a pal halfway around the world.
Pretty cool.
First, get your parent’s consent and assistance.
To find a pen friend, search the Web (with your parent’s
permission), and ask your teachers or librarian if they
know of a reputable pen pal service. Some services
are free; others charge a small fee. You may need to
complete an application with some general information
about yourself—your age, country, and hobbies,
among other things. Again, be sure you have your
parent’s permission and help with finding a pen pal.
Your family may want to rent a post office box so that you don’t have
to use your street address. Have your parent read your letter to make sure
you don’t give out information that should not be shared (such as your
phone number and daily schedule). Also, find out how much postage the
letter needs; mailing a letter to a foreign country costs more than mailing
one in the United States or its territories (such as Puerto Rico and Guam).
Here are some tips when it is time to start writing.
• A neat, handwritten letter is always the most personal.
• Open and close your letter with an upbeat message (“I hope
you are doing well,” “I’m looking forward to hearing from you soon”).
• Ask about hobbies, interests, family life, pets, and customs.
You can share the same type of information and, if your parent says
it is OK, exchange photos, too.
• If you receive any gifts from your pen pal, be sure to let your
parent know, especially if it is a food item. Let your parent check it out.
• For safety reasons, never agree to meet your friend without your parent’s
knowledge and permission. And, if your pen pal ever discusses anything
that makes you feel uncomfortable, tell your parent right away.
Finally, respond to your pen pal promptly—and have fun!


16 STAMP COLLECTING
Introduction to Stamp Collecting.
Most stamps are printed on paper, although
sometimes, to further interest collectors, they are
printed on other material, such as foil or plastic.
Plastic stamps issued to satisfy collectors’ interests
are not used to mail letters. Sometimes called labels,
they are not highly regarded by stamp collectors.
Plastic stamps that are issued to meet postal needs—
such as sale through postal machines, as in areas where
humidity is a problem—are used to mail letters, and
are of interest to collectors.
The more research you put into the stamps you
choose to collect, the more you will learn and the more fun
you will have. You will learn how to recognize foreign countries
by the names on the stamps while learning about their history
and customs.
Plastic stamp
Many of the space exploration flights
by NASA have been pictured on stamps
issued by other countries. Depicting
events of other countries is a way to
show friendship with those countries.


STAMP COLLECTING 17
.Introduction to Stamp Collecting
Identifying
Stamps
Stamps from Great Britain
show no identifying name
(see figure 1). The names of
other areas like Canada and
New Zealand are plainly
inscribed on the stamps in
figures 2 and 7. Identifying
most stamps is usually just
this easy, although sometimes
the foreign names of the
countries may be different
from their English names.
For example, on the stamps
in figures 4 and 5, one can
easily figure out that España
means Spain and that
Danmark means Denmark.
The stamp in figure 6
shows a map of India and is
obviously an Indian stamp.
The stamp in figure 3 with the
inscription Magyar Posta
is more difficult, since there
is no phonetic similarity
between Magyar and its
English equivalent, Hungary.
With experience, collectors
can learn to recognize the
foreign-language names
of such countries. Stamp
identifier books are also
available to help identify
inscriptions on stamps.
Figure 5
Figure 6Figure 2
Figure 7
Figure 4
Figure 3
Figure 1





STAMP COLLECTING 19
.Types of Stamp Collecting
Types of Stamp
Collecting
For many years, stamp specialists
tried to collect all the stamps issued
by a specific country. In spite of the
great number of stamps that a coun-
try can issue and the expense associ-
ated with collecting so many, some
collectors still pursue this type of col-
lection. Stamp collecting today,
though, is very flexible.
Topical Collections
Topical stamp collecting is one of the
most interesting and versatile forms
of the hobby. A topical collection
focuses on the subject pictured on the
stamp, not on the country issuing the
stamp. The collector picks the focus or
topic and develops it to fit personal taste.
Collectors can choose from an unlimited number of topics.
For some topics, a limited number of stamps will be available,
while for others, there may be hundreds to choose from. The
collector should pick a topic that is neither too broad nor too
narrow in scope, that fits the collector’s interest, and that
reflects his or her ability to obtain the stamps.
A collector interested generally in sports might focus on
stamps related to the Olympics or to a favorite sport, such as
track, soccer, or baseball. Some collectors focus on art, music,
or religion. Others might collect birds, butterflies, insects, maps,
or railroads. Topical collecting is fun because it can link two or
more interests into a single hobby.
Scouts sometimes collect Scouts on
stamps like the ones shown here. More
than 135 countries have issued stamps
related to Scouting.


20 STAMP COLLECTING
Types of Stamp Collecting.
Topical collecting can be fun to share with others who
do not collect stamps. While a specialized collection of a single
set of stamps, such as the 1938 United States presidential
definitives, may interest only a limited number of advanced
stamp collectors, featuring aviation, baseball players, or Disney
characters on stamps appeals to many people.
Topical stamps can be obtained in several ways. The most
convenient and inexpensive source is your own daily mail. Also
ask friends and neighbors to save stamps on the topic of your
collection. If you have a family friend who owns a business, ask
him or her to save pieces of mail as well.
Another fun aspect of topical stamp collecting is
the arrangement and display of the collection in
albums. Collectors can creatively mount the stamps
in a way that appeals to their personal taste. Some
collectors use computers to design special pages
for a collection, but printing by hand or typing a
page can serve just as well.
You may also want to buy packets of stamps on major
topics at stamp shops, at stamp shows, or through
advertisements in magazines. Stamps in packets are
often inexpensive because they are fairly common.
This is an excellent way to start a stamp collection
without spending a lot of money. Additional stamps can
be added to the basic collection as your interest in and
knowledge of the collection grow.


STAMP COLLECTING 21
.Types of Stamp Collecting
Other Types of Collections
Most experienced collectors have more than one interest in
stamps. A collector can, for example, focus on stamps of the
United States while specializing in trains as a topical collection.
A variety of definitive and commemorative stamps and
postal stationery can make an interesting and inexpensive type
of collection. Covers—or envelopes—showing different postal
rates and classes make a challenging collection. Even advertis-
ing covers used to promote different products can be collected.
Without spending a cent, you can easily collect 50 to a hundred
items that reflect the complexity of the modern mail system,
from your family’s mail.
Some collectors specialize in
meter imprints and labels. These can
be collected historically, going back
to the many types used since the
1920s or focusing on current use
alone. Some companies use interest-
ing slogans with the postmark. Even
the design of the meter imprint can
be the focus of a collection.
Postmarks and cancellations
can also be interesting to collect.
Some people collect postmarks that
have their names in them. Others
seek old postmarks from towns
where they live. Some collect special
cancellations, such as those that
picture flags or fancy designs.
A special type of stamp, such as
an airmail or postage-due stamp,
can be the focus of a collection.
Unusual shapes—triangles,
diamonds, even banana
shapes—can be the basis for
a very attractive collection.
The USPS made history on March 13, 1997, when it issued—
for the first time ever—the triangular-shaped Pacific ‘97
stagecoach and clipper ship stamps.


22 STAMP COLLECTING
Types of Stamp Collecting.
Still other forms of collecting are based on postal history.
Collectors keep the entire cover so that the postmarks and
auxiliary marks will show how the envelope went through the
mail. In an election year, covers mailed by political candidates
can make a colorful collection. Some people specialize in
covers associated with a significant historical event—a war or
a presidential inauguration, for example. Advertising covers
related to a special interest—envelopes from hardware stores
that show tools, envelopes from zoos that show animals, etc.
—can also make an enjoyable collection.
These first day
covers pay tribute
to Scouting
around the world.


STAMP COLLECTING 23
.Types of Stamp Collecting
First day covers are very popular collectibles. On the first
day that a stamp is released for sale, a ceremony is held, and a
special cancellation marking the release of the stamp is made
available to cancel the mail. Collectors buy or prepare their own
envelopes, which usually have cachets—pictures or words that
relate to the new stamp. The envelope and the new stamp then
receive the special cancellation. The USPS now allows an
extended period of time after the first day to cancel and obtain
these covers.
Some collectors try to get a cover for each new stamp.
Others specialize in a single stamp and collect as many different
cachets as possible. Contact an experienced collector or your
local post office for instructions on how to obtain such cancella-
tions. A collection of first day covers with cachets drawn by the
collector can be a truly creative achievement.
A Tale of Two Collectors
Stamp collecting can be a lifelong adventure. James
Chenevert, of Peoria, Ill., began his adventure when he discov-
ered his dad’s old leather briefcase buried deep within a closet.
Inside was an album stuffed with pages of colorful postage
stamps showing presidents and America’s national parks. James
says, “I was fascinated by these miniature works of art and the
stories they could tell.”
His first collection was a complete set of the 1938
Presidential Series, or
“Prexies.” From there he
went on to collect diesel and
steam locomotives on
worldwide stamps and later
collected stamps and first
day covers showing Boy
Scouts around the world.
When James became
interested in space and
space exploration, he started
a collection of stamps that
depicted rockets, astronauts,
and cosmic phenomena.
That collection later became
the core of his first award-
winning philatelic exhibit,
“Exploring the Universe.” James Chenevert


24 STAMP COLLECTING
Types of Stamp Collecting.
In 2009, James was selected to be one of the first three
Fellows of the Young Philatelic Leaders Fellowship. During his
yearlong fellowship, he built a gold medal–winning philatelic
exhibit telling the story of security features on modern U.S.
postage stamps. He also attended several national stamp shows
around the country and visited the Smithsonian’s National
Postal Museum in Washington, D.C., and the American
Philatelic Society’s national headquarters in Bellefonte, Pa.
Says James, “Stamp collecting has been an adventure
for me.”
Nancy Clark, of Cape Cod, Mass.,
has been collecting for decades. Her
collection is so big that she has a 20-by-
40-foot room in her house called the
“stamp room,” that she shares with her
husband, a fellow collector. It is lined
with floor-to-ceiling shelves filled with
books, catalogs, and other research
materials, as well as copies of her
stamps and covers. She keeps the actual
stamps in a vault at a local bank.
Her hunt for stamps and other
postal collectibles takes her to at least
five shows a year—sometimes in other
countries. Nancy also corresponds with
other stamp collectors all over the
world—mostly via the internet. They ask each
other’s opinions about recent acquisitions by sending scans—
computerized pictures—of their latest finds. “Before email, it
used to take a month to exchange letters with someone overseas.
Now it can be done almost instantaneously,” Clark says.
Like James, Nancy started her stamp collection while in
elementary school. She first focused on collecting boat stamps.
Later, as a young adult, she broadened her collection to include
sports stamps, particularly Olympic stamps, and mail post-
marked in her favorite state, Maine.
Her reputation grew. She served as president and judge for
the international stamp show held at the 1996 Summer Olympic
Games in Atlanta, Georgia, where people from around the
world entered their collections in competition.
“The winning collection always tells a story,” Clark says.
“It’s not just a group of rare stamps.”
What is her
collection worth?
“I have no idea,”
Nancy Clark says.
“My motivation
isn’t the money
but the thrill of
the hunt.”
Nancy Clark


STAMP COLLECTING 25
.Types of Stamp Collecting
Thousands of listeners around the world tune in to the American Philatelic
Society’s weekly podcast, “StampChats,” a live chat that explores a variety
of aspects of the hobby. Tune in to the program at stamps.org/news/sc/
stampchats/p/1 or download the programs for later listening. Be sure to
get your parent or guardian’s permission first.





STAMP COLLECTING 27
.The Language of Stamp Collecting
The Language of
Stamp Collecting
Like many hobbies and fields of study, stamp collecting has its
own language, or terminology. You will find it easier to collect
stamps when you know the hobby’s special terms. As your
interest and knowledge of stamp collecting grow, your stamp
vocabulary will grow accordingly.
The glossary below lists some of the special terms used
by stamp collectors. Additional terms and definitions can be
found in stamp catalogs and other reference materials available
in local libraries.
aerogramme. A letter sheet made of a single
sheet of lightweight paper with gummed flaps,
normally used for international airmail. When
folded and sealed, the message is on the
inside; the outside resembles an envelope
on which a stamp has been printed.
Aerogramme


28 STAMP COLLECTING
The Language of Stamp Collecting.
airmail stamp. A stamp formerly issued to
prepay airmail postage rates, especially for
foreign or overseas mail, which were usually
more expensive than surface mail. Since 1977,
the United States mail has been carried by air,
when appropriate, at no extra charge.
approval. A convenient method by which a dealer sends selec-
tions of stamps to the prospective buyer. From these stamps the
collector chooses items to purchase and returns the balance
with payment.
block. A unit of four or more unseparated stamps. A block of
four stamps is two stamps high and two stamps wide. A plate
number block shows the number of the plate used to imprint
the stamp.
When purchasing stamps on approval, be sure to return all the ones you
don’t want to keep so that you won’t be charged for them.
Airmail stamp
Blocks of stamps


STAMP COLLECTING 29
.The Language of Stamp Collecting
booklet. A small sheet of stamps specially cut to be sold in
booklets. A booklet can be a self-adhesive sheet designed to
be folded by the customer.
cachet. A design printed on an envelope to commemorate a
special event such as the issuance of a new stamp, the presi-
dent’s birthday, or a stamp show.
cancellation. A marking put on a stamp by a postal authority
that shows the stamp has been used and can’t be reused.
catalog value. The value that is printed in a specific catalog
indicating a price for purchasing the stamp from a dealer.
Cancellation
Cachet


30 STAMP COLLECTING
The Language of Stamp Collecting.
coil stamp. A stamp issued in a long, rolled strip—with the
stamps connected endways or sideways—generally for use by
stamp-dispensing machines.
commemorative stamp. A stamp issued
to honor an important person, place,
event, or other aspect of our national
culture. These stamps are usually
available for sale only for a limited
time at the post office.
cover. An envelope that has been
sent through the mail.
definitive stamp. A common stamp, usually small and
printed in large quantities, in regular use over a period
of years (until the next increase in postage rates). Also
called a “regular” stamp. In contrast, commemorative
stamps usually stay on sale less than a year after
their issue.
error. A mistake in the production of a postage stamp
that was not caught before the stamp’s release to the
public. These include inverted centers and mistakes in
color, paper, etc.
face value. The value, or denomination, of a stamp,
as it appears on the stamp.
fake. A real stamp that has been changed in some way to make
it more desirable to collectors. For example, it may have been
repaired or regummed.
PLATE NUMBER
On this strip of stamps from a coil, note the
plate number near the bottom of the stamp,
to the far right.
Definitive stamp
Commemorative stamp


STAMP COLLECTING 31
.The Language of Stamp Collecting
first day cover. An envelope with a stamp affixed that has
been canceled on the first official sale date of the stamp.
Forever stamps. In 2007, the U.S. Postal Service introduced
Forever stamps. These stamps are always equal in value to the
current first-class mail rate for a one-ounce letter, no matter
what you originally paid for them. This means you can use any
Forever stamp—no matter how old it is—to mail a letter. Rather
than having a particular denomination on them, these stamps
say “Forever.”
hinge. A small strip of paper gummed on one side and used
by collectors to put their stamps in albums or on pages.
Today, collectors store mint stamps with full gum or
expensive stamps in a mount or a stockbook, not hinged.
hologram. An image that looks three dimensional.
Holograms have appeared on some modern stamps.
imperforate stamp. A stamp issued without perforations.
mint stamp. A stamp that was never postally used. If a
mint stamp still has all its original gum intact with no
disturbances (such as a hinge mark), it is classified as
mint never hinged (MNH).
First day cover
Mint condition


32 STAMP COLLECTING
The Language of Stamp Collecting.
mount. A clear, thin plastic
holder in which a stamp is
placed in an album. Mounts
protect stamps by reducing
handling and eliminating
hinge marks. Mounts are
usually used for more
valuable stamps.
overprinted stamp. A
stamp that has printing
applied to it after original production.
Overprinting may indicate the stamp has
been used in more than one country or to recognize
a special event, to change a stamp’s value, or for other than
postal use.
packet. A container full of assorted, unmounted stamps, offer-
ing an inexpensive way to begin a stamp collection.
perforations. Small holes or slits around the perimeter of a
stamp that enable one stamp to be separated from another.
philately. The collection, study, and enjoyment of postage
stamps and other postal materials.
plate number block (PNB) or coil (PNC). A block or coil of
stamps bearing the number of the plate used in printing.
Overprinted
stamps
Plate block


STAMP COLLECTING 33
.The Language of Stamp Collecting
postage meter stamps and
labels. Meters are used by
businesses and other organizations
with large mailings. They can
be set for varying amounts of
postage, and include a form of a
precancel that may have special
slogans or marks.
postal card. A government-produced card, usually with a
stamp imprinted in the upper right-hand corner that pays the
postage fee. Also called a “stamped postal card.”
postcard. A privately produced card with a picture or informa-
tion on one side and a space for a message and address on the
other. A stamp must be affixed to pay the postage fee.
postmark. An official mark applied to mail in
the postal system; usually includes the date
and place of the mailing.
precanceled stamp. A stamp can-
celed before it is placed in the mail,
usually by a mechanized printing pro-
cess. Normally produced by heavy
users of mail, these require a special-
use permit from the postal service.
Postal card
Postage meter
stamp
Precanceled stamps


34 STAMP COLLECTING
The Language of Stamp Collecting.
regular or definitive stamp. A common
stamp, usually small, in regular use over
a period of years.
se-tenant stamps. Stamps joined
together as in the original sheet but
differing in design, denomination,
overprint, or color. Sometimes, by
combining a series of connected
stamps, a picture is created (see the
Northeast Deciduous Forest stamp
sheet in “Introduction to Stamp Collecting”).
self-adhesive stamp. A stamp backed with pressure-
sensitive glue.
selvage. The paper margin around panes of stamps.
semipostal stamp. Postal authorities sometimes issue special
stamps for which an amount is charged in addition to the
regular postage. This extra fee or surcharge is designated for
some special purpose that benefits special groups such as
child-care and special-education agencies.
series. A number of individual stamps or sets of stamps having
a common purpose or theme issued over a long period of time.
sheet. As printed, this is a complete unit consisting of four or
more panes of stamps, each of which is cut apart when the
stamps are sent to the post office. The size and design of the
stamp affects the size of the pane and sheet.
souvenir sheet. A sheet of one or more postage stamp designs
that usually has a commemorative inscription or artwork in
the border.
Regular, or
definitive, stamp
Se-tenant stamps


STAMP COLLECTING 35
special stamp. A stamp that may be
reprinted and is used for periods lon-
ger than commemoratives but
shorter than definitives. Love,
Christmas, and Express Mail
stamps are examples.
stamped envelope. A mailable
envelope on which the post office
has printed or embossed a stamp.
tagging. The chemical marking of postal items to
help prevent mail fraud and allow them to be
read by mail-sorting machines.
unused stamp. A stamp that has no cancellation
or other sign of use.
used (canceled) stamp. A stamp that has been
canceled so that it cannot be used again.
watermark. A design sometimes pressed into
stamp paper while it is being made.
Stamped envelope
Special stamps
Used, or canceled, stamp


36 STAMP COLLECTING
The Language of Stamp Collecting.
Assessing a Stamp’s Value
Stamps are described in terms of their “grade” and “condition,”
and both affect their price.
Stamp Grade Definitions
Grade has to do with how well the stamp design is centered.
Condition addresses factors other than centering.
Extremely Fine. The stamp appears to be almost
perfectly centered.
Very Fine. The design is very well-centered, with the four
margins between 50 percent and 100 percent equal. That is,
the widest margin is not more than twice the width of the
narrowest margin. A stamp with the perforation barely
clearing the design on any side does not qualify as Very Fine.
Very Fine Fine–Very Fine
Fine Average


STAMP COLLECTING 37
.The Language of Stamp Collecting
Fine–Very Fine. The design is well-centered. Either the vertical
margins or the horizontal margins qualify as at least Very
Fine (the wider margin is not more than twice the width of
the narrower), while the other margins qualify as at least Fine
(the perforations visibly clear the stamp design).
Fine. The perforations visibly clear the stamp design on all
four sides.
Average. The perforations cut slightly into the design on
one side.
Stamp Condition Definitions
Many factors, such as margins, color, and condition of the gum,
are important in the valuation of the stamp. The more perfect
the stamp, the higher the price. Here are some of the words
used in assessing the value of a stamp:
Original Gum. Gum as applied to the stamp when it
was manufactured.
Regummed. A stamp that for some reason has lost its gum
and to which new gum has been applied.
No Gum. Stamps sent through the mail and removed from
envelopes by soaking have no gum. Some mint stamps are
issued without gum.
Never Hinged. Stamps that have never been hinged and whose
gum shows no evidence of disturbance. With the development
of good mounts, many collectors demand stamps that are
classed as mint never hinged (MNH).
Lightly Hinged. A stamp showing a faint trace of a gum
disturbance where the hinge has been removed.
Heavily Hinged. A stamp showing a hinge remnant on the
back, or evidence of missing gum.
Other faults that affect the grading of stamps are missing perfo-
rations, tears, thin spots, pinholes, creases, etc. These flaws can
cause a stamp to lose all or most of its value.





STAMP COLLECTING 39
.The Design and Production of Stamps
The Design and
Production of Stamps
Many steps happen between the design of a stamp and the
finished product used by consumers.
Birth of a Stamp Design
For U.S. stamps, the design process begins with the Citizens
Stamp Advisory Committee. Each year this group of volunteers
sifts through some 50,000 ideas for new stamps submitted to
the Postal Service. The committee members decide on a limited
number of subjects that will actually be made into stamps.
Their goal is to pick stamp subjects that depict a broad range of
people, places, and events that have affected our culture. Then
the committee works with stamp designers, subject
experts, and artists to come up with the finished designs.
The designs can be quite elaborate. Take the “Nature
of America” series of U.S. stamps sheets, issued in panes
of 10. Together, the 10 stamps, along with additional
space between the stamps, form a single natural scene
full of plants and animals. The first pane depicted the
Sonoran Desert in the American Southwest. The last
pane in the series, issued in 2010, showed the
Hawaiian Rainforest.
All the panes in the series were painted by
artist John Dawson of Hilo, Hawaii. For each
pane, the committee supplied Dawson with a
list of plant and animal species from which to
choose. “Then I made rough sketches of the
critters for them to look at,” he said. Subject
experts reviewed his sketches and suggested
improvements, making a beak longer here,
for example, or a tail wider there.


The Design and Production of Stamps.
Southern Florida Wetland stamp sheet, designed by artist
John Dawson
One challenge John Dawson faced was showing animals
of vastly different sizes—say, a Florida panther and a
sparrow—in the same scene without distorting their
proportions. “I did it with a careful use of perspective,”
Dawson said, “putting the big critters in the background
and the small critters up front.”


STAMP COLLECTING 41
.The Design and Production of Stamps
Once the design was approved, Dawson rendered the final
painting. He managed to cram 27 different species into his
scene. He painted on an illustration board roughly twice the
size of the 5-by-7-inch stamp pane. The image was later
reduced for printing.
The Nature of America stamp sheets—12 different ones—
were wildly popular, selling up to 10 million copies each and
making Dawson a celebrity among stamp collectors. “In March
2005, the Northeast Deciduous Forest sheet was unveiled at a
ceremony during a stamp show in New York City,” he recalled.
“So many people were in line, I signed autographs for two
whole days.”
The Manufacturing Process
Once a design has been approved, an appropriate printing
method is selected; then the stamps are printed; and finally, the
stamps are “finished,” or processed into a particular format, such
as sheets, books, or coils, using a particular type of separation.
Stamp Printing Methods
Stamps throughout the world are printed in three basic ways:
with the design (1) above the surface of the printing plate,
(2) level with the surface, or (3) below the surface.
Letterpress or Typography. In this printing method, the design
is inked above the surface of the plate. In a rotary letterpress,
the plate is a cylinder that revolves as the paper passes under it.
In typography, the plate is flat, and the printing is done on
a flatbed press. Most overprinted, surcharged, and precanceled
stamps are typographed.
Letterpress
Each year,
collectors spend
up to $200 million
on U.S. stamps
like Dawson’s that
may never be
used for postage,
but only for
collecting and
display. That
added revenue
helps the Postal
Service offset
costs in
other areas.
INK
PAPER
PLATE


42 STAMP COLLECTING
The Design and Production of Stamps.
Engraving and Gravure. Both
are intaglio processes, which
means that the design stays
below the surface of the print-
ing plate. In engraving, thick
ink that remains slightly raised
is used, whereas in gravure
printing, a thinner
ink that pours like water
is used. When the plate
is inked, the excess ink
on top is wiped clean
before the paper is impressed.
The gravure cylinder revolves
in a tray of ink, and the excess
ink on the surface of the
cylinder is scraped clean by
a metal blade. The etched
“wells” fill with ink, and
the paper, pressed against
the wiped cylinder,
actually pulls the ink by
suction from the plate.
Lithography or Offset
Lithography. In this printing
method, the design is level
with the printing plate
surface. Because the oil-
based ink does not mix
with the water that moistens
the blank area of the plate,
an impression of just the
design results. In offset
lithography, the design is
printed from the metal plate
to a rubber-covered cylinder
and then to the paper. Lithography
WATER
ROLLER
INK ROLLER
PLATE
CYLINDER
RUBBER
“OFFSET”
CYLINDER
PAPER
PRESSURE
CYLINDER
Intaglio
DOCTOR
BLADE
PRESSURE
CYLINDER
PAPER
PAPER
CYLINDER
INK
Gravure
INK
PAPER
PLATE


STAMP COLLECTING 43
.The Design and Production of Stamps
Separations
Perforated Stamps. Perforations make it possible to
separate stamps from one another with ease. Before self-
adhesive stamps became common, most stamps were per-
forated with small holes by machines that remove the
paper from the holes.
Pane stamps are perforated on all four sides; booklet
pane stamps are perforated on one, two, or three sides;
and coil stamps are printed in strips
and perforated on just
two sides.
Imperforate Stamps. The early
United States stamp issues had to
be cut apart with scissors and are
referred to as imperf stamps. Most
imperf stamps today are issued by
countries in the hope that collectors
will buy the stamps,
thereby generating reve-
nue, but not use them
except in their collections,
thereby saving the cost of
providing postal services.
Die-Cut Stamps. A cutter,
or die, cuts the stamp paper
into the desired shape.
This form of separation is used
for self-adhesive stamps. Die-
cuts can give stamps straight
edges, shapes, or
imitation perforations.
Modern presses in all processes print several colors at
the same time (except in engraving, where each color
must be printed separately). Many stamps listed in
catalogs as multicolored were made from four different
color-process plates. By using screens of three basic
colors—red, yellow, and blue—plus black, every
color can be reproduced in printing.
Imperforate
stamps and
souvenir sheet
Self-adhesive die-cut stamps
make stamp-licking a thing of
the past.
Perforated


The Design and Production of Stamps.
Types of Paper and Adhesive
Most stamps are printed on paper. Many are still printed with a
gummed backing that you moisten for adhesion. Due to popu-
lar demand, however, more and more stamps are being made
with a pressure-sensitive adhesive that requires no moistening.
These stamps come with a protective backing that you peel off
the stamp before affixing the stamp to an envelope.
In rare cases, paper is not used. Plastic sheets are some-
times used so that the stamps can be sold more easily in
vending machines. Holographic and three-dimensional stamps
also require a special printing surface.
Because gum reacts with high humidity (causing stamps to
stick together), countries have experimented with different
types of gum. Stamps issued without gum or pressure-sensitive
adhesive must have an adhesive applied by the sender.
Nearly all of
today’s U.S.
postage stamps
use pressure-
sensitive adhesive.


STAMP COLLECTING 45
.The Design and Production of Stamps
Online Postage
In recent years, the USPS has let people print their own
postage and mailing labels at home, using personal
computers and printers. The Postal Service has also
licensed outside companies, or vendors, to provide
online postage products. These companies allow you to
upload a photograph of your own choosing that will be
made into a sheet of postage stamps that you can use
in the regular mail. So it is now
possible to put your own
picture, or that of, say,
your dog, on a real
postage stamp.





STAMP COLLECTING 47
.Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures
Catalogs, Equipment,
and Procedures
As you learn more about collecting stamps, you will discover
the resources that are most helpful to you for the type of
collection you want to build.
Stamp Catalogs
The catalog published by Scott Publishing Company is used
by most stamp collectors in the United States. Other catalogs
are also useful, especially those covering special topics. The
American Topical Association, for example, publishes several
topical handbooks and checklists. Many public libraries have
stamp catalogs or can borrow them from other libraries.


48 STAMP COLLECTING
Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures.
To look up a stamp in a catalog, first determine the country
that issued the stamp. Then compare its design with the stamp
illustrations in the catalog. Time to identify the stamp can be
saved by looking at it for clues. For example, if you find a pic-
ture of President Kennedy on a stamp, it must have been printed
after 1960, the year he was elected. If there are several stamps
with the same design but different identifying numbers, you
might have to check the perforations, color, paper, or watermark
to identify the exact stamp.
Because there are so many factors in the value of stamps,
it is best to collect what you can afford and what you enjoy.
If you buy stamps simply in the hope that their value will rise,
you might be disappointed. You might also miss the pleasure
of collecting other stamps that may be more fun to acquire
and display.
The Scott catalog
value is a retail
price that reflects
recent selling
prices. The value
of stamps also
depends on supply
and demand.
Common stamps
often sell for less
than catalog
value. Values
also rise and fall
as conditions
in the stamp
market change.
Places to Visit
Visit a post office, stamp club, stamp store, or stamp
show with an experienced collector, parent, or friend,
or with your merit badge counselor. Your local library
might have stamp newspapers, magazines, books, or
other materials that will be helpful in your research.
Tip: Call in advance and make an appointment before
you visit your local post office. Be sure you plan
your visit during business hours when the post office
is less likely to be very busy, such as midmorning
or midafternoon.


STAMP COLLECTING 49
.Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures
Equipment and Procedures
An important part of any stamp collection is the album in which
the stamps are stored. An album helps to organize the collection
in a logical order and protects the stamps from damage. You can
make your own or purchase one of the many types of albums
for stamps and covers on the market. A printed album with
spaces for specific stamps can serve as a stamp identifier and
can make mounting your stamps easier.
Reference: Scott 2001 Standard Postage Stamp Catalogue, Volume 1
BASIC INFORMATION
OF STAMP OR SET
ILLUSTRATION NUMBER
SCOTT NUMBER
DENOMINATION
METHOD USED TO
PRINT THE STAMP
COLOR OR OTHER DESCRIPTION
CATALOG VALUES
1. USED
2. UNUSED
LISTING
STYLES
1. MINORS
2. MAJORS


50 STAMP COLLECTING
Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures.
However, as a beginning stamp collector, you might not
know which topic or country you want to collect. To avoid
spending a great deal of money on an album that could later
be of little use, you might start with a three-ring binder and
some graph paper (craft-weight). You can buy blank pages with
or without borders and headings, or you can generate your own
pages using a computer. This type of album makes the mixed
mounting of stamps and covers easy and avoids empty spaces
that make the collection look incomplete.
Another option for your three-ring binder is to use stock
sheets, which are heavy pages with strips that form pockets
to hold the stamps. They come with prepunched holes that
fit your binder. Stock books are volumes with the stock
pages bound in. In a stock book, the pages cannot be removed
or rearranged.
Although most
printed albums
are organized by
country, topical
albums are
available for
special interests. Tip: Do not use a “magnetic” type photograph album
for your stamp collection. The adhesive used on the
pages will ruin your stamps.


STAMP COLLECTING 51
.Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures
Your albums, binders, or stock books should be stored in
an upright position away from heat, moisture, and light. If
stored in a damp basement or near a window, the stamps can
collect moisture and be damaged. Also, avoid eating or drink-
ing while working with your collection.
Stamps are soaked in cool water to remove them from the
paper they are attached to. Once the paper and stamps have
separated, place the stamps into rinse water to remove any
additional paper particles; remove the stamps from the rinse
water; and place them facedown on an absorbent surface. If
the stamps curl while drying, flatten them under a heavy
weight. New self-adhesive stamps sometimes will not separate
from the envelope using only water. A special chemical (found
at stamp supply stores) may be needed to remove
such stamps.
Tip: Use only cool—never hot—water to
loosen a stamp from paper
A stamp hinge is a piece of specially
gummed, translucent paper that is usually hori-
zontally prefolded to make a hinge. First affix the
short portion of the hinge to the back of an inex-
pensive stamp just below the top. The bottom of the hinge (the
longer side) is attached to the page of the album. Apply mois-
ture to the short side by gently touching it with the tip of your
tongue and blotting it lightly on your lower lip
before placing it correctly
on the back of
the stamp.
Tip: Store your stamps away from heat, moisture, light,
food, drinks, and young brothers and sisters, too.
BACK OF STAMP
HINGE
MOISTEN HERE


52 STAMP COLLECTING
Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures.
The amount of moisture you apply is important—the
smallest amount will make the hinge stick to the stamp. Next,
apply only a small amount of moisture to the bottom portion
of the hinge to be attached to the page. You want to keep the
stamp free to lift so you can view the backing.
To remove a hinged stamp from an album, carefully grip
the stamp and the attached hinge with tongs and gently pull
down to release both from the album. The hinged stamp then
can be placed facedown and the hinge pulled away slowly from
the stamp. If the hinge appears to tear or pull paper fibers from
the stamp, stop and soak it off with water.
Stamp mounts are small, transparent pockets into which a
stamp can be slipped and mounted on a page. Stamp mounts
are usually preferred for mounting mint stamps, rare stamps,
and fragile stamps. The back of the mount has a special gum
that, when moistened at the top, can be placed on your album
page. By using this type of mount, you do not disturb the gum
of mint stamps.
Tip: Steam or hot water may cause colors to run; soak
separately any stamps that have colored cancellations
or are on colored paper.
Stamp mounts come in a variety of sizes to suit the collector’s
different needs.
Never attempt to
remove a hinge
from a freshly
hinged stamp
until it has
dried thoroughly.


STAMP COLLECTING 53
.Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures
Several different types of mounts are available. One type is
a sleeve that covers the stamp; another consists of two pieces
that form a “track” for the stamp to sit in. As you become more
familiar with working with stamps, you can decide which type
best suits you. Why not use stamp mounts for all of your
stamps? Many collectors don’t, because stamp mounts are more
expensive than hinges and must be purchased in various sizes
to fit stamps of different sizes. With hinges, one size fits all.
Envelopes can be attached to a page with corner mounts,
triangular “pockets” with gummed backs. To protect covers,
a transparent protective material such as polyester film can be
put over the envelope first. Both the sheet protector and the
cover can then be attached safely to the album page with the
corner mounts.
Tip: Do not use any type of tape, rubber cement, or
glue to affix your stamps or envelopes in an album.
The chemicals in these materials can quickly migrate
into your collection and cause perma-
nent damage and staining.


54 STAMP COLLECTING
Catalogs, Equipment, and Procedures.
Store excess stamps that you haven’t had time to sort yet
in semitransparent glassine envelopes, which come in various
sizes, or polyethylene sleeves made for storing covers (enve-
lopes and postcards). The polyethylene sleeves are clear,
allowing you to see their contents at a glance.
In addition to mounts, hinges, and albums, there are other
tools you will need.
Stamp tongs look like tweezers but have rounded tips for
grasping. They are approximately 5 inches long and make
handling stamps much easier. Tongs also help protect stamps
from soil and damage. Even when your fingertips appear to be
clean and dry, they can still contain body oils and perspiration
that can damage stamps.
A magnifying glass is helpful for
examining the fine details of a stamp’s
design, allowing you to recognize
and enjoy the fine art of an
engraved stamp.
All the special
tools you will need
as a stamp
collector can be
found at stamp
shows or hobby
shops that spe-
cialize in stamp
collecting, through
mail order, and
on the internet
(only with
your parent’s
permission
and assistance).
Magnifying glass
Stamp tongs


STAMP COLLECTING 55
Perforation gauges are
used to measure the number
of holes within a 2-centimeter
length on a stamp. The perforation
gauge was developed to allow a collector
to identify stamps by distinguishing among
the many types of perforations that have
been used over the years.
One type of watermark detector is a
shallow, black or dark-colored dish in
which the stamp in question is exposed
to a nonflammable watermark detector
fluid that is used to detect a watermark
design in the stamp’s paper. When the
paper is manufactured, raised areas on the rollers
transfer a subtle design, called a watermark, to the paper pulp.
An ultraviolet (UV) light is a basic tool used by stamp
collectors to detect and identify luminescent stamps, stamps
coated with “invisible” fluorescent ink. A UV light also will
help the collector determine whether or not repairs have been
made to a stamp.
Perforation gauges
Tip: Ultraviolet lights are harmful to the eyes. Before
using such a device, consult with your qualified
merit badge counselor to learn how to take the
necessary precautions.





STAMP COLLECTING 57
.Displaying Your Collection
Displaying Your
Collection
Part of the fun of stamp collecting is sharing it with others,
whether just family and friends or the general public, say, at
a stamp show. You might just pull prepared album pages from
your loose-leaf notebook to display part or all of your collec-
tion. Your display should have a theme, which can be broad—
such as all foreign stamps—or narrower, such as stamps from
a particular country. Topical collections also make for good dis-
plays. No matter what the theme, try to arrange your collection
so that it tells a story. You may wish to add a title page that
explains what will follow.
At stamp shows, specially prepared pages
are displayed in frames that usually contain
16 pages each. Many shows have sections
for exhibits by young collectors. Attend a
stamp show to get ideas for how best to
exhibit your own collection. Also contact
your merit badge counselor or a
member of a local stamp club for
more information about putting
together a good display.
For many people
who begin stamp
collecting at
a young age,
the hobby
develops into a
lifelong pursuit.


58 STAMP COLLECTING
Displaying Your Collection.
Ideas for Laying Out Pages
The following illustrations show some simple layouts for
display pages. Remember that the layout of your collection
is up to you—use your creativity.


STAMP COLLECTING 59
.Displaying Your Collection





STAMP COLLECTING 61
.Fun Projects
Fun Projects
There are many fun and rewarding projects that you could do
to fulfill requirement 7. Here are a few suggestions.
Designing a Stamp
First determine what you would like your stamp to depict.
Will it commemorate a person, place, or thing? Are there
printed stamps you could use as references? Here are some
examples of different stamp designs.
As you design
your stamp, keep
in mind that it
does not need to
be an illustration.
Use a favorite
photo along
with your own
design elements.


62 STAMP COLLECTING
Fun Projects.
Designing a Cancellation
Special cancellations usually focus on a special event, cause,
or theme. They can have simple designs or have complex and
detailed ones that relate to a stamp, cachet, or special event.
You will need to check the Domestic Mail Manual at your local
post office or on the internet for requirements on designing
a cancellation.
Designing a Cachet
A cachet is a design that is usually hand-drawn, rubber-
stamped, or printed on the left side of an envelope. Cachets are
usually created to draw attention to the stamp on the envelope
or to an event you are promoting.
To make a cachet on a photo-
copy machine, open a 63
⁄4-inch
envelope completely. Using your
imagination, draw your own design
or select a picture to place on the
open envelope. Make as many
copies as desired. Cut each copy
to envelope size, fold, and glue
together to simulate an envelope
(a filler card might be added
before closing). Address the
envelope, attach the correct
postage, and have the envelope
canceled by mailing
it to yourself.
With your parent’s
permission, visit
the U.S. Postal
Service online
at www.usps.com.
Your stamp design can be
as simple or as complex as
you desire.


STAMP COLLECTING 63
.Fun Projects
You can easily make a cachet using your computer and
printer. Design the cachet using your own software, use
the “page setup” to indicate the print specifications
(size, format, and so on) of the envelope, and send it
to print.
Use cachets like these
for inspiration as you
design your own.





STAMP COLLECTING 65
.The U.S. Postal Service From Past to Present
The U.S. Postal Service
From Past to Present
The United States Postal Service is a descendant of the
oldest department in the U.S. government. That depart-
ment was formed by action of the Continental Congress
in 1775, and Benjamin Franklin was named the first
postmaster general. When the U.S. Constitution was
adopted in 1789, all postal services came under the
control of the federal government. The present
system still reflects the many plans and methods
devised by Franklin.
The means of transporting the mail progressed
along with the country—from on foot, to horse-
back, stagecoaches, steamboats, railways, and
eventually, aircraft. More recently, the USPS has
been building up the world’s largest fleet of
alternative-fuel vehicles that use clean fuels such
as ethanol and electricity.
One of the most significant changes in the postal
system was the adoption of postage stamps as the method of
payment for carrying the mail. Following the British innovation
in 1840, the first U.S. stamps were issued on July 1, 1847. This
new system required the sender to prepay the fee instead of the
receiver paying it. Through the years, the system has been
modified and the equipment improved to keep up with the
increase in quantity of mail processed.
In the early 1960s, it became obvious that there was a
great need for a system that would process mail mechanically
or electronically. A system using the now-familiar zip (zone
improvement plan) code was installed on July 1, 1963. On
September 13, 1978, the USPS announced a plan to assign an
additional four-digit code to further assist in the sorting of mail.


66 STAMP COLLECTING
The U.S. Postal Service From Past to Present.
Because of many difficulties, both financial and
organizational, the U.S. Congress passed the Postal
Reorganization Act, which was signed into law by
President Richard Nixon on August 12, 1970. On July
1, 1971, the Post Office Department became the U.S.
Postal Service, an independent agency dedicated to
providing affordable and efficient mail service to
everyone in the country, no matter where they live.
Handling the Mail Is a Big Job
We have all seen letter carriers delivering mail to houses.
But few of us realize how big a job that really is. As of 2020,
the USPS:
• Delivered 129 billion pieces of mail to 161.4 million delivery
addresses
• Operated more than 31,000 post offices
• Took in $73.1 billion a year in revenue
• Employed more than 644,000 people
If we look at some of the major steps that must take place to
get the letter from where it was mailed to the mailbox at your
door, we can better understand and appreciate the United States
Postal Service.


STAMP COLLECTING 67
.The U.S. Postal Service From Past to Present
Let’s suppose that someone places a letter to you in a
mailbox in a city 200 miles from your house. Later that same
day, all the letters that have accumulated in the mailbox are
picked up by a letter carrier and taken to the local post office,
where they are placed in trays.
The trays are then carried by truck to an area processing
station, where they are further sorted by zip code. In a process
called dispositioning, the mail is faced, or arranged, so that the
stamp is in the same position on each piece, allowing the letters
to be canceled by a clerk or a machine. The trays of letters are
then picked up by postal employees and loaded into trucks for
distribution to local post offices or loaded onto airplanes for
delivery to more distant places.
The destination post office must then sort the mail and
distribute it to the proper mail carrier, who will make one final
sort before delivering the mail to the appropriate address along
his or her route.
This is a simplified description of the USPS’s complex
procedures. Many special machines have been developed to
streamline and automate the process. Advancing technology
continually improves the way we get our mail.





STAMP COLLECTING 69
.Interesting Stories About Stamps
Interesting Stories
About Stamps
Some stamps have interesting stories behind them.
One such stamp is known as the First Scout stamp.
During the South African War in the late 1800s, the
British commander was Robert S.S. Baden-Powell.
To help communications, Baden-Powell formed a
cadet corps of boys, who served as uniformed mes-
sengers, carrying messages from the commander to
his outposts.
During the long siege of Mafeking, the officers
began producing postage stamps, mostly for their
own amusement. When Baden-Powell discovered
what they were doing, he suggested that his mes-
senger, Cadet Sgt. Maj. Goodyear, be pictured on
one of the stamps. These stamps were recognized as real
postage stamps when the war ended in 1902.
In 1907, Baden-Powell formed the Scouting movement. In
later years, he called young Goodyear his “first Scout,” because
Baden-Powell’s ideas for Scouting had been forming during the
siege of Mafeking.
The first stamp, known throughout the world as the Penny
Black and depicting Queen Victoria, was introduced in England
in May 1840. The stamp’s use on an envelope indicated that
postage had been paid. On July 1, 1847, the United States
started issuing postage stamps featuring George Washington
and Benjamin Franklin.


70 STAMP COLLECTING
Interesting Stories About Stamps.
In 1918, a 24-cent airmail stamp was issued honoring the
Curtiss JN-4 “Jenny,” a World War I biplane that became an
airmail plane. About 700 of the stamps were misprinted with
the plane upside down. Postal authorities destroyed 600 of the
mistakes, printed in sheets of 100 each, before they were circu-
lated. The remaining sheet was inadvertently sold to a collector
in Washington, D.C., and was later resold as single stamps and
panes. In 2005, a block of four “inverted Jenny” stamps sold
at auction for $2.7 million.
The stamp shown here
is one of the world’s
most valuable stamps.
In 2021, it was sold at
auction for $8,300,000,
and its face value, or
original value, was
1 cent. This stamp was
printed in 1856 in the
British colony of British
Guiana, now the inde-
pendent country of Guyana. British Guiana’s stamps
normally were printed in England. This one, however,
was printed in the colony as part of a temporary stock,
because supplies were slow in arriving from England.
Seventeen years after it was printed, the stamp
was found by a 12-year-old boy, L. Vernon Vaughan, in
the attic of his home in British Guiana. He soaked it off
the envelope and put it in his album, but later sold it to
a local collector. It was sold many times, each time for
a higher price, until 1980, when it brought the then–
world’s record price for a single stamp. As you can see,
the corners have been clipped and the surface has been
badly rubbed. But it is the only known stamp from this
rare issue, and so its poor condition does not detract
from its value.


STAMP COLLECTING 71
.Interesting Stories About Stamps
A stamp collection sometimes becomes valuable not so
much because of the stamps in it but because of who collected
them. In 2005, the Smithsonian Institution’s National Postal
Museum in Washington, D.C., paid $53,000 for the boyhood
stamp collection of John Lennon, a member of The Beatles,
the most famous rock-and-roll band of all time.
To help build his collection, Lennon, who lived in
Liverpool, England, saved stamps off of letters from relatives in
New Zealand. His collection consists of 565 stamps in a single
album. Pages of the album can be viewed
at the museum’s website (see the
resources section).
John Lennon’s album from childhood
John Lennon, who wasn’t all that
serious about his collection,
sketched beards and mustaches
on the likenesses of Queen
Victoria and King George VI on
his stamp album’s title page.





STAMP COLLECTING 73
.Stamp Collecting Resources
Scouting Literature
Collections merit badge pamphlet
Books
Adams, Charles F. Stamp Collecting:
The Complete, Easy Guide to the
World’s Most Popular Hobby.
Dell Publishing, 1992.
Baadke, Michael. Linn’s Complete
Stamp Collecting Basics.
Linn’s Stamp News, 2004.
Bierman, Stanley. More of the World’s
Greatest Stamp Collectors.
Linn’s Stamp News, 1990.
Cabeen, Richard M. Standard
Handbook of Stamp Collecting,
new revised ed. Random House
Value Publishing, 1986.
Carlton, R. Scott. International
Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Philately.
Krause Publications, 1997.
Datz, Stephen R. Official
Stamp Collector’s Bible.
House of Collectibles, 2002.
———. Stamp Collecting: Discover
the Fun of the World’s Most
Popular Hobby! General Trade
Corporation, 2009.
Dyer Sr., David O. Is Stamp Collecting
the Hobby for You? Truman
Publishing Company, 1998.
Eisenberg, Ronald L. The Jewish
World in Stamps: 4,000 Years of
Jewish Civilization on Postal Stamps.
Schreiber Publishing Inc., 2002.
Giffenhagen, George and Jerome
Husak. Adventures in Topical Stamp
Collecting. American Topical
Association, 1997.
Herst Jr., Herman. Fun and Profit in
Stamp Collecting. Amos Press, 1988.
Hudgeons Jr., Thomas E. The Official
Blackbook Price Guide to U.S.
Postage Stamps 2013. House of
Collectibles, 2012.
Jonath, Leslie. Postmark Paris: A Story
in Stamps. Chronicle Books, 2005.
———. Stamp It!: The Ultimate Stamp
Collecting Activity Book. Chronicle
Books, 2002.
Stamp Collecting Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


74 STAMP COLLECTING
Stamp Collecting Resources.
Kloetzel, James E., ed. Scott Standard
Postage Stamp Catalogue 2014. Scott
Publishing Company, 2013.
MacKay, James. The World Encyclopedia
of Stamps and Stamp Collecting:
The Ultimate Illustrated Reference
to Over 3,000 of the World’s Best
Stamps. Lorenz Books, 2005.
O’Keefe, Donna, ed. Linn’s Stamp
Identifier. Linn’s Stamp News, 2004.
Sine, Richard L. Stamp Collecting for
Dummies. For Dummies, 2001.
United States Postal Service.
Postal Service Guide to U.S. Stamps.
Published yearly.
Williams, L. N. Fundamentals of
Philately. American Philatelic
Society, 1990.
Youngblood, Wayne L. All About
Stamps: An Illustrated Encyclopedia
of Philatelic Terms. Krause
Publications, 2000.
Periodicals
Linn’s Stamp News
P.O. Box 926
Sidney, OH 45365-0926
www.linns.com
Mekeel’s & Stamps Magazine
42 Sentry Way
Merrimack, NH 03054
www.stampnewsnow.com
Organizations and
Websites
American Air Mail Society
P.O. Box 110
Mineola, NY 11501-0110
www.americanairmailsociety.org
American Association of
Philatelic Exhibitors
www.aape.org
American First Day Cover Society
P.O. Box 16277
Tucson, AZ 85732-6277
www.afdcs.org


STAMP COLLECTING 75
.Stamp Collecting Resources
American Philatelic Society
American Philatelic Research Library
100 Match Factory Place
Bellefonte, PA 16823
www.stamps.org
American Stamp Dealers Association
P.O. Box 692
Leesport, PA 19533
www.asdaonline.com
American Topical Association
P.O. Box 8
Carterville, IL 62918-0008
www.americantopicalassn.org
Ebony Society of Philatelic Events
and Reflections
P.O. Box 1757
Lincolnton Station
New York, NY 10037-1757
esperstamps.org
International Machine
Cancel Society
3097 Trobisher Ave.
Dublin, OH 43017-1652
www.machinecancel.org
Museum of Postal History
339 N. Main St.
Delphos, OH 45833-1575
www.postalhistorymuseum.org
National Postal Museum
2 Massachusetts Ave. NE
Washington, DC 20002
www.postalmuseum.si.edu
Philatelic Foundation
341 W. 38th St., 5th Floor
New York, NY 10018
www.philatelicfoundation.org
Post Mark Collectors Club
www.postmarks.org
The Postal History Foundation
920 N. First Ave.
Tucson, AZ 85719
www.postalhistoryfoundation.org
Postal History Society
P.O. Box 468101
Atlanta, GA 31146
www.postalhistorysociety.org
Precancel Stamp Society
P.O. Box 1013
Fenton, MO 63026-1013
www.precancels.org
Scott Publishing Company
P.O. Box 828
Sidney, OH 45365-0828
www.linns.com
Scouts on Stamps Society
International Inc.
P.O. Box 6228
Kennewick, WA 99336
www.sossi.org
Spellman Museum of Stamps
and Postal History
Regis College
235 Wellesley St.
Weston, MA 02493
www.spellman.org
United Postal Stationery Society
Central Office
P.O. Box 3982
Chester, VA 23831
www.upss.org
If you are requesting information
from any of these organizations,
be sure to include a self-addressed,
stamped (first class) envelope.


76 STAMP COLLECTING
Stamp Collecting Resources.
Universal Ship Cancellation Society
747 Shard Court
Fremont, CA 94539-7419
www.uscs.org
The Washington Press
2 Vreeland Road
Florham Park, NJ 07932
www.washpress.com
Wineburgh Philatelic
Research Library
The University of Texas at Dallas
P.O. Box 830643
Richardson, TX 75083-0643
library.utdallas.edu/special-collections-
and-archives/philatelic-collection
Young Stamp Collectors of America
100 Match Factory Place
Bellefonte, PA 16823
stamps.org/learn/youth-in-philately
Foreign Postal
Administrations
Australia Post
www.auspost.com.au
Austrian Post
www.post.at/en
Bulgarian Posts
www.bgpost.bg/en?cid=3
Canada Post
www.canadapost.ca
Czech Post
www.ceskaposta.cz/en
Post Danmark (Denmark)
www.postnord.dk/en
La Poste (France)
www.laposte.fr
An Post (Ireland)
www.anpost.ie
Israel Postal Company Ltd.
www.israelpost.co.il
Poste Italiane (Italy)
www.poste.it
Japan Post
www.post.japanpost.jp/english
Latvijas Pasts (Latvia)
www.pasts.lv/en
P & T Luxembourg
www.post.lu
TNT Post (Netherlands)
www.postnl.nl/en
New Zealand Post
stamps.nzpost.co.nz
Norway Post
www.posten.no/en
Poczta Polska (Poland)
znaczki.pocztapolska.pl
Philatelic Center of French Polynesia
www.fenuamarket.pf/en
CTT Correios (Portugal)
www.ctt.pt
Singapore Post
www.singpost.com
Posta Slovenije (Slovenia)
www.posta.si/home
South Africa Post Office
www.postoffice.co.za
Swiss Post (Switzerland)
www.swisspost.ch
United Kingdom Royal Mail
www.royalmail.com
United Nations Postal
Administration
unstamps.org


STAMP COLLECTING 77
.Stamp Collecting Resources
From the USPS
Postal Facts
facts.usps.com
The United States Postal Service also
offers a free guide called “The Art of
Stamp Collecting” (publication 225). Visit
your local post office or download it from
about.usps.com/publications/
pub225/welcome.htm.
In addition, the USPS has a special
program for first day covers. The USPS
gives postal customers 30 days to obtain
a first day of issue postmark by mail.
Buy the new stamp at a local post office,
affix the stamp to an envelope addressed
to yourself (or someone else you desig-
nate), and send it in a larger envelope to
the USPS. (The address appears at the
bottom of each stamp release; check with
your local post office.) Individual first
day covers can be ordered by writing to
the USPS, Stamp Fulfillment Services,
P.O. Box 7247, Philadelphia, PA 19101-
7097; or call toll-free 800-STAMP-24;
or visit store.usps.com.
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful
to the following individuals for their
assistance with updating the Stamp
Collecting merit badge pamphlet:
United States Postal Service, in particu-
lar Mark Saunders (senior community
relations specialist), Cindy L. Tackett
(manager, Stamp Products and
Exhibitions), and with special thanks to
Courtney Loy (Rights and Permissions
Program); Janet Houser, program coor-
dinator, American Philatelic Society;
Wilson Hulme, curator of philately, and
Allison Gallaway, public affairs officer,
the Smithsonian Institution’s National
Postal Museum; artist John Dawson;
and Scott S. Stuckey, National Science
Teachers Association.
The Boy Scouts of America thanks
the following people and organizations
in the preparation of this and/or previ-
ous editions of the Stamp Collecting
merit badge pamphlet: American
Philatelic Research Library; American
Philatelic Society; American Stamp
Dealers; American Topical Association;
Brookman Stamp Company; Kim
Kowalczyk; Linn’s Stamp News;
Mekeel’s & Stamps Magazine; John
Murray; Scott Publishing Company;
and Scouts on Stamps Society
International Inc., Baden-Powell
Chapter 1.
The Boy Scouts of America is grate-
ful to the men and women serving on
the National Merit Badge Subcommittee
for the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.


78 STAMP COLLECTING
Stamp Collecting Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Berries stamp image ©1999 United
States Postal Service. All rights
reserved. Used with permission.—
page 30 (top)
Donald Chenevert III, courtesy—
page 23
Nancy Clark, courtesy—page 24
Cloudscapes stamp series ©2004 United
States Postal Service. All rights
reserved. Used with permission.—
page 61 (top right)
Extreme Sports stamp image ©1999
United States Postal Service. All
rights reserved. Used with permis-
sion.—page 43 (bottom)
HAAP Media Ltd., courtesy—cover
(stamps at top left and bottom
center, postcards)
Hanukkah stamp image ©1996 United
States Postal Service. All rights
reserved. Used with permission.—
page 61
Houser, Janet, courtesy—page 59
Love stamp image ©1999 United States
Postal Service. All rights reserved.
Used with permission.—page 61
Mark Twain stamp image ©1985 United
States Postal Service. All rights
reserved. Used with permission.—
page 27
Mary Lyon stamp image ©1987 United
States Postal Service. All rights
reserved. Used with permission.—
page 9
Northeast Deciduous Forest stamp
series ©2005 United States Postal
Service. All rights reserved. Used
with permission.—page 13
Dennis Oda, Honolulu Star-Bulletin,
courtesy—page 40 (bottom)
Old Glory stamped envelope ©1995
United States Postal Service. All
rights reserved. Used with permis-
sion.—page 35 (center)
Pacific Stagecoach stamp image ©1997
United States Postal Service. All
rights reserved. Used with permis-
sion.—page 21 (bottom)
The Postal Service Guide to U.S.
Stamps™ cover. ©2005 United States
Postal Service. All rights reserved.
Used with permission.—pages 12
and 47 (top left center)
Red Cloud stamp image ©1987 United
States Postal Service. All rights
reserved. Used with permission.—
page 30 (bottom)
Roger Maris stamp image ©1999 United
States Postal Service. All rights
reserved. Used with permission.—
page 31 (bottom)
Smithsonian National Postal Museum,
courtesy—page 71 (both)
Southern Florida Wetlands stamp series
©2006 United States Postal Service.
All rights reserved. Used with per-
mission.—pages 39 (both) and
40 (both top)
Yorkshire post card ©1988 United States
Postal Service. All rights reserved.
Used with permission.—
page 33 (center)


STAMP COLLECTING 79
.Stamp Collecting Resources
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by the Boy Scouts
of America.
Jennifer Horn—page 15
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 41–42 and 51
Stamp Honors
Scouting’s Centennial
In celebration of the Boy Scouts of
America’s 100th Anniversary in 2010,
the U.S. Postal Service issued a
“Scouting” stamp. The stamp, which
portrays the outdoor adventure aspect
of Scouting, was designed by illustrator
Craig Frazier. The depiction of a Scout
atop the summit of a mountain, with
the silhouette of a Scout viewing the
distance through binoculars, conveys
a nostalgic sentiment for Scouting’s
now more than century-long history
in the United States.


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.