STAR RANK REQUIREMENTS
Notes: For Venturers working on Scouts BSA requirements, replace “troop” with “crew” and “Scoutmaster” with “crew
Advisor.” For Sea Scouts working on Scouts BSA requirements, replace “troop” with “ship” and “Scoutmaster” with “Skipper.”
6
Assistant patrol leader is not an approved position of responsibility for the Star rank.
7
If your family does not have internet access at home AND you do not have ready internet access at school or another public
place or via a mobile device, the Personal Safety Awareness videos portion of this requirement may be waived by
your Scoutmaster in consultation with your parent or guardian.
8
If the board of review does not approve the Scout’s advancement, the decision may be appealed in accordance with Guide
to Advancement topic 8.0.4.0.
 LEADER
INITIAL
& DATE
1. Be active in your troop for at least four months as a First Class Scout.
(See page 24.)
2. As a First Class Scout, demonstrate Scout spirit by living the Scout Oath
and Scout Law. Tell how you have done your duty to God and how you
have lived the Scout Oath and Scout Law in your everyday life.
(See pages 11–16 and 23.)
3. Earn six merit badges, including any four from the required list for Eagle.
You may choose any of the 18 merit badges on the required list for Eagle
to fulfill this requirement. See Eagle rank requirement 3 for this list.
(See pages 28 and 416–420.)
NAME OF MERIT BADGE DATE EARNED
(Eagle-required)
(Eagle-required)
(Eagle-required)
(Eagle-required)
4. While a First Class Scout, participate in six hours of service through one or
more service projects approved by your Scoutmaster.
5. While a First Class Scout, serve actively in your troop for four months in
one or more of the following positions of responsibility (or carry out a
Scoutmaster-approved leadership project to help the troop):
(See pages 422-425.)
Scout troop. Patrol leader, assistant senior patrol leader, senior patrol
leader, troop guide, Order of the Arrow troop representative, den
chief, scribe, librarian, historian, quartermaster, bugler, junior assistant
Scoutmaster, chaplain aide, instructor, webmaster, or outdoor ethics guide. 6
Venturing crew/Sea Scout ship. President, vice president, secretary,
treasurer, den chief, quartermaster, historian, guide, boatswain,
boatswain’s mate, yeoman, purser, storekeeper, chaplain aide, outdoor
ethics guide, crew leader, media specialist, specialist or webmaster.
Lone Scout. Leadership responsibility in your school, religious organization,
club, or elsewhere in your community.
6a. With your parent or guardian, complete the exercises in the pamphlet How
to Protect Your Children from Child Abuse: A Parent’s Guide.
6b. With your parent or guardian’s permission, view the Personal Safety
Awareness videos. 7 (See the pamphlet inserted inside the front cover.)
7. While a First Class Scout, participate in a Scoutmaster conference.
(See page 418.)
8. Successfully complete your board of review for the Star rank. 8 (See page 414.)
450