SUSTAINABILITY





SUSTAINABILITY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”
On our cover: The shy giant panda, one of the world’s
rarest animals, has a specialized diet that depends on
bamboo. As people cleared more and more bamboo for
building, industry, and farming, the panda lost more
of its food source and its home. This great animal is
also very slow to reproduce, which contributes to its
vulnerability. We now know that the panda needs to
be protected.


2 SUSTAINABILITY
Note to the Scout and
Counselor
Enough. For all. Forever.
Scouts practice sustainability in their personal and Scouting
activities. Sustainable practices ensure that we leave our homes,
our campsites, and our world better for the future.
Scouts have a choice between the Environmental Science
and Sustainability merit badges on their trail to Eagle Scout.
These brief descriptors can help you decide which badge most
appeals to you.
Environmental Science is about our place in the ecosystem
and how our actions have impacts on all other living things. It’s
about the science of our place in and interrelationships within
the ecosystem. (Science)
Sustainability is about the social responsibility we have
knowing that we share the planet with 8 billion people. Our
responsible actions can ensure that we continue to use resources
in ways that allow others to have that ability in the future.
(Ethics)
Sustainability is a systems issue. Our homes, communities,
and the world are all systems of interrelated components. The
status and use of resources in one area can affect the health and
conditions in others. For example, improving energy can either
positively or negatively impact other systems. Our sustainable
future requires that we align our systems so they work in
harmony, not in competition with each other. Scouts need to be
mindful of systems as they address the requirements.
The options in the requirements illustrate what a big and
complex topic sustainability is. They show the diversity of issues
the world is dealing with — and the issues that Scouts will deal
with throughout their lives.
The Sustainability Resources listed toward the end of this
pamphlet provide important background for the requirements.
Scouts can also satisfy their curiosity about sustainability topics.


SUSTAINABILITY 3
This list is, of course, not the only resource a Scout can rely
upon. Many other websites have valuable information.
For this merit badge, Scouts will learn to appreciate
various aspects of sustainability. They’ll learn ways to assess
and improve personal, family, community, country, and global
sustainability.
Here is more important information for Scouts:
• Scouts are strongly encouraged to get and use a copy of the
current Sustainability merit badge pamphlet. Use extreme
caution in downloading illegally scanned pamphlets and
workbooks that are likely out-of-date and violate copyright
laws.
• Scouts are also strongly encouraged to discuss the badge with
their merit badge counselor before starting the requirements.
• Scouts are encouraged, but not required, to involve their
family in some of the requirements.
• Your counselor will be engaging you in conversation to ask
what you’ve learned. You’ll also discuss how you plan to apply
your new knowledge to your life as a Scout and as a good
citizen in a sustainable society. If the requirement states
“share,” “discuss,” ”give,” or “tell,” you should have notes,
graphics, and/or talking points about the topic. Your counselor
might ask you to identify your sources. Be prepared.
• Copying graphics from a website is acceptable. A graphic can
count toward the writing requirement as long as you add
commentary/context in your own words.
Counselors: Accommodations to Scouts with special needs
should be made on a case-by-case basis. For example, you can
adapt verbs such as “write” to accommodate individual Scouts
who use alternative ways to communicate.





SUSTAINABILITY 5
35711
ISBN 978-0-8395-0030-8
©2026 Scouting America
2026 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to scouting.org/merit-badges/sustainability
or check Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
Scan this QR code for the latest Sustainability requirements.
FPO





SUSTAINABILITY 7
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Sustainability: What Does It Mean? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
Sustainable Water Use . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23
Eating Sustainably . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Designing Sustainable Communities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Achieving Sustainable Energy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
What About Our Other Stuff? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 69
Earth’s Life-Support Systems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
Toward a Sustainable Future . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91
Careers in Sustainability . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 95
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 98
Sustainability Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 102





.Introduction
SUSTAINABILITY 9
Introduction
Sustainability. It’s a big word with
many aspects. But when you break
it down, it goes hand in hand with
being a good Scout. Sustainability
means the ability to endure.
Conserving the land, forests, air,
water, wildlife, and limited resources
we all share is everyone’s responsibility.
Reducing what we consume and recycling,
repurposing, restoring, and repairing what we own
all are parts of being thrifty, a key point of the Scout Law.
Sustainability requires living within our world’s ability to
regenerate the things we need to live. As good Scouts, we try
to leave things better than we found them. We should try to do
what we can to ensure generations to come will also have what
they need.
We human beings can lighten our imprint on planet Earth by
managing the way we consume resources. Conserving the land
where we walk, the forests that surround us, the air we breathe,
the water all living things need to survive, and the other resources
Earth provides is important to sustaining life itself—not just for
your lifetime, but for future generations.
The Big Picture
Healthy ecosystems (environments full of living things)
provide goods and services to humans and are vital to
all forms of life, from the tiniest organisms to the tallest
trees, and from bugs to whales.


Introduction.
Sustainability
begins with you.
Can you bike or
walk to school or
work instead of
drive? Or can
you take public
transportation?


.Introduction
SUSTAINABILITY 11
On a worldwide level, sustainability may involve urban
planning that reorganizes living situations into eco-villages
and eco-cities, where green building and green technologies,
renewable energy sources, and sustainable agriculture become
the new normal.
Sustainability begins with rethinking your individual lifestyle
and becoming aware of how you can conserve natural resources.
Moving toward a more sustainable lifestyle will challenge the
attention, ingenuity, and know-how of your generation—the
youth of America.
We all have a stake in preserving life. We all share in the
responsibility to make our planet a desirable place, now and in
the future. Human actions have lasting social, environmental,
and economic effects on the place we all call home: Earth.
Sustainability is a journey, not a destination. It is a call to
action. What can a single Scout do? A family? One community?
It’s time to find out! This is a journey that begins with you.
SUSTAINABILITY
PEOPLE
EQUITY
PROSPERITY
ECONOMY
PLANET
ENVIRONMENT
SOCIAL-
ENVIRONMENTAL
ECONOMIC-
SOCIAL
ENVIRONMENTAL-
ECONOMIC
This diagram shows how sustainability intersects with the three
P’s (people, prosperity, planet) and the three E’s (equity, economy,
environment). It helps us understand our current situation and
how we might find solutions. Source: Safeway Inc.





.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
SUSTAINABILITY 13
Sustainability: What
Does It Mean?
To “sustain” a thing is to keep it up or continue it. Sustainable,
then, relates to methods of harvesting or using resources in ways
that do not squander or permanently damage them. A sustainable
lifestyle or society meets today’s needs without depleting
(completely using up) natural resources for future generations.
Two definitions capture our interpretation of sustainability:
“Sustainable activity meets the needs of the present without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs,” or “Enough. For All. Forever” and “Reduce. Reuse.
Recycle.”
Sustainable Development Goals
The 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, adopted by all
United Nations member states in 2015, provides a shared
blueprint for peace and prosperity for people and the planet,
now and into the future.
At its heart are the 17 Sustainable Development Goals
(SDGs), which are urgent calls for action by all developed and
developing countries. This global partnership recognizes that
ending poverty and other struggles must go hand in hand with
strategies that improve health and education, reduce inequality,
and spur economic growth, all while tackling climate change
and working to preserve our oceans and forests.


14 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability: What Does It Mean?.
With a parent or guardian’s permission, learn more about the UN’s
Sustainable Development Goals at un.org/sustainabledevelopment/.
Scouting and SDGs
Among the 17 sustainability goals, these five are
particularly relevant to Scouts:
• Clean Water and Sanitation
• Affordable and Clean Energy
• Industry, Innovation, and Infrastructure
• Life Below Water
• Life on Land


SUSTAINABILITY 15
.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
Located in
West Virginia,
the Summit is
reaching for a
goal of net zero
through design
of the site and
its buildings and
utilities. Learn
all about the
Summit and
net-zero energy,
water, and waste
in this chapter.
Scouts for SDGs
Each of us has the power to make a positive impact. Scouts for
SDGs is a global mobilization effort to inspire and enable young
people to become global citizens by taking action on the
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs).
Through Scouting America’s educational program and local
projects, Scouts for SDGs offers opportunities for Scouts like you
to explore, grow, and give back in your own unique ways. After
all, as Scouts, we’re bound by the Scout Oath and Law to do our
best, help others, and make the world a better place.
For more than a
century, Scouts have
helped transform
communities by
finding solutions that
lead toward a better
world. Today, this
movement has grown
to over 57 million
people learning and
contributing in 174
countries.


16 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability: What Does It Mean?.
The Summit: Leading the
Way to a Sustainable Lifestyle
With the design and construction of the Summit Bechtel Family
National Scout Reserve, Scouting America saw an opportunity to
explore how communities can
become more sustainable. The
reserve turns into a busy city of
50,000 people during the
National Jamboree. That is larger than many towns in America. A
commitment to sustainability ensures that the Summit is strong
and successful for Scouts today and for generations to come.
A few key principles of Scouting guided the sustainable
design of the Summit:
1. Be thrifty and resourceful in our use of energy and water.
2. Apply and expand outdoor ethics beyond the backcountry
by considering how we use materials and reduce waste in
all operations.
3. Be good stewards of our human and natural communities by
creating healthy places today and for future generations.
4. Demonstrate leadership in sustainability by measuring our
efforts and continually improving.
Scouting America has pledged to work toward a “net zero”
property. Net zero is an ambitious goal that will take some time
to reach. In order to achieve net zero, the Summit will need to:
1. Produce as much clean, renewable energy as it uses each year.
2. Collect water from the Summit’s own watershed and treat it
passively (making use of natural water treatment methods)
before returning it to the soil.
3. Find creative ways to eliminate sending material to the
landfill.
Buildings on-site are designed to conserve 30 percent more energy
than typical buildings of the same size, staying cooler in summer
and warmer in winter through their shape and location. Their
doors, windows, and walls exchange very little heat or cold with
the outside, requiring less energy to heat and cool the inside.
Beneath the ground of the Summit Center are geothermal wells
that keep the buildings warm in winter and cool in summer.


SUSTAINABILITY 17
.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
The Sustainability Treehouse
The Sustainability Treehouse at the Summit is a net-zero structure with
solar panels and wind turbines. The panels collect sunlight and turn solar
energy into electricity. Atop the treehouse, you can see a vertical wind
turbine designed to work at lower elevations, where wind speeds are
slower. The treehouse combines a number of sustainability features with
fun, education, and purpose. It is a “living playground” on three levels,
ending at the top with a transparent enclosure.
1
2
3
4
5
6
SOLAR PANELS
RECYCLED-STEEL FRAME
WIND TURBINES
RADIANT HEATING
AND NATURAL
VENTILATION
COMPOST TOILET
COMFORT STATION EDIBLE FOREST GARDEN
Mithun Inc., courtesy


18 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability: What Does It Mean?.
Scouts admire a natural waterfall at the Summit in West Virginia.


SUSTAINABILITY 19
.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
The Summit is designed for people, not cars and trucks.
Within its compact footprint, Scouts live close to activities and
amenities. A network of trails through the woods and around the
lake connects base camps to central and adventure areas. Fewer
vehicles mean cleaner air and a safer, healthier environment for
Scouts and guests.
In order to reach the goal of net zero water, the Summit
concentrates first on finding ways to use less water and to apply
passive treatments for processing any water used on-site.
• Shower water usage has been reduced with low-flow
showerheads and spring valves that turn off automatically.
Water temperature in most shower houses is about the same
temperature as the surrounding air (called ambient
temperature). Cooler water usually means shorter showers —
and less water usage.
• Graywater, the water that drains from sinks and showers, is
cleaned and reused to flush toilets and urinals. This will save


20 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability: What Does It Mean?.
11 gallons per day per Scout—a savings of 4.4 million gallons
in the course of a single jamboree.
• Blackwater, the water that is flushed down toilets and urinals,
is treated without chemicals at an on-site wastewater plant
and then used to irrigate the surrounding forest. No
wastewater leaves the site. Instead, it serves to put important
nutrients such as phosphorus and nitrogen back into the soil.
• Stormwater, which runs off roofs, roadways, and paved areas, is
also treated on-site over 70 acres of biofiltration. The dirty
water is carried in a network of swales (depressions or low-lying
land) and rain gardens that allow the water to soak back into the
soil while the plants filter out oil and sediments.
Careful construction with green (nonpolluting) building materials
to create a healthy environment, and efforts to conserve and
protect sparkling mountain streams and 1,600 acres of forest,
ensure that Scouts today and in the future will be able to enjoy
the Summit’s Appalachian landscape.
The average American uses 80 gallons of water per
day. At the Summit, conservation measures like low-
flow fixtures and graywater systems have reduced that
amount to 30 gallons.


SUSTAINABILITY 21
.Sustainability: What Does It Mean?
Talk to Your Family About Sustainability
Work with your family to adopt sustainable practices. Although not
required, you can meet with your family and talk about how conservation
and stewardship relate to sustainability.
Discuss the behavioral changes and life choices that your family can
make to live more sustainably. Scouting has taught you values that you
use in your everyday life. How can living by the Scout Oath and Law in
your daily life help promote sustainability and good stewardship? Your
family can then work to change your practices toward a more sustainable
lifestyle.





SUSTAINABILITY 23
.Sustainable Water Use
Sustainable Water Use
In the United States, people are fortunate to have easy access to
some of the safest treated water in the world. For most of us,
that means simply turning on the tap.
How much water do we use? According to the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency, the average American family
of four uses 300 gallons of water per day at home. Indoor usage
accounts for 70 percent of this whopping amount, with 30 percent
used outdoors. That’s 146,000 gallons per year—for one family!
Outdoor usage depends on how dry your region is and whether
you have a water-intensive landscape.
Less than 1 percent of all
the water on Earth can be used
by humans. The rest is salt
water from the ocean or water
permanently frozen and not
available for drinking, bathing,
or watering plants. As the
world’s population grows, more
people are using this limited
resource. It’s important that we
all use water wisely.
Wisdom starts with
understanding and becoming
aware of how you use water
and how much water you
waste. Take note of places inside
and outside your home where
you use water. This might include the kitchen, bathrooms,
laundry room, and outdoor faucets. Look carefully at all the
ways you and your family use water every day.
A fully loaded dishwasher is
usually the most efficient way
to wash dishes, especially if
your dishwasher has an Energy
Star rating. Use the “light”
cycle for day-to-day loads that
aren’t heavily soiled.


24 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainable Water Use.
Water-Saving Tips
It might surprise you where you use the most water each day.
Flushing a toilet claims nearly 27 percent of family water use each
day. The clothes washer uses nearly 22 percent, with the shower
taking up almost 17 percent. The faucet is around 15 percent, and
leaks take up almost 14 percent.
Do you wash your dishes in a dishwasher? Is your dishwasher
energy efficient? If it is, you may use about four gallons of water
to wash a load of dishes. If it is an older model that isn’t rated for
energy efficiency, you might be using about six gallons of water
for every load.
If you wash your dishes by hand and run the water the entire
time to rinse them, you can use up to 16 gallons of water for one
load. Don’t let the water run. Instead, fill one sink with soapy
water and the other with rinse water.
Here are more water-saving tips for your home:
• Run your dishwasher and wash your laundry only when you
have a full load. You can save up to hundreds of gallons of
water a month just doing these two things.
• Use the garbage disposal sparingly, if at all. Compost your raw
vegetable food waste instead, and save gallons every time.
Toilet
Leaks
Other
Clothes washer
Faucet
Shower
SHOWER
16.8
FAUCET
15.7
CLOTHES WASHER
21.7
OTHER
5.3
LEAKS
13.7
TOILET
26.7
Source: American Water Works Association


SUSTAINABILITY 25
.Sustainable Water Use
• When brushing your teeth, simply turning off the tap while
you brush can save up to eight gallons of water per day per
person. That adds up to 200 gallons a month.
• Don’t leave the water running when you wash your hands.
Wet your hands, shut off the water, lather your hands, then
turn the faucet back on to rinse.
• A bath uses about 70 gallons of water, and a shower takes about
25 gallons. To save water, take a shower and time yourself. Keep
it under 5 minutes. For greater savings, wet down, then turn off
the water. Wash your body and your hair, then turn on the water
just to rinse.
• A small leak in a toilet can waste 200 gallons of water per day.
That’s like flushing your toilet 50 times for no reason.
• What about water use outdoors? Here are ways to conserve:
• Use a hose sparingly. To wash your bike or your car, use a
bucket of sudsy water and a sponge. Spray with the hose only
to rinse. Some commercial car washes recycle water instead of
letting it run down the sewer drain. Ask your parent or
guardian to check whether a car wash near you recycles water.
• If you use sprinklers, adjust them so they water only the
lawn—not the house, sidewalk, or street.
• Check your outside faucets for leaks. Water your yard in the
early morning and then only as much as needed.
• Place buckets under eaves or install
rain barrels under downspouts to
collect rainwater from the roof for
watering your yard. You will be
surprised how much water you
can collect in a short rainstorm.
Using water that would otherwise
be lost or run off beats running a hose, which can discharge
up to 10 gallons a minute.
• In the summer, especially if you live in a region that is hot and
dry, adjust your lawnmower to a higher setting. Taller grass
holds moisture and shades the roots from the sun better than
close-clipped grass.
Try this experiment with your parent or guardian’s help:
Test for leaks in your toilet by placing a drop of food
coloring in the toilet tank. If the color shows up in the
bowl without flushing, you could have a leak.


26 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainable Water Use.
• Spread about 4 inches of mulch on top of the soil around the
plants in your yard to protect the roots from heat and cold and
to help keep moisture from evaporating. Your family will need
to replace the mulch every few years to keep it 4 inches thick.
Many cities and towns offer free mulch to homeowners. City
workers cut tree limbs to keep them out of power lines, and they
may also take in Christmas trees and wood scraps that people
put out for recycling. All of these natural items can be ground
up into mulch. Check with your town or county to see if they
have a free mulch program.
If your yard is xeriscaped (with plants such as
succulents and cactus that don’t take much water) or if
you have shrubs, trees, and grass native to your region
planted in your yard, once the plants are established,
you should have to water them only once a month. If
the soil is wet two to three inches down, that’s enough.
Daily watering is
not necessary,
even in the hottest
climates. Plants
will grow longer
and stronger roots
if you don’t over-
water them. Once
a week is plenty.
Only water until
the soil is wet 2
inches down.


SUSTAINABILITY 27
.Sustainable Water Use
Be water-smart with your pets, too. If you own a fish tank,
when you clean the tank, recycle the nutrient-rich water to outdoor
plants. When you refresh your pet’s water bowl every day, recycle
the water in the yard. When it’s warm enough, bathe your pets
outdoors so you are watering the yard at the same time.
Your Family’s Water Bill
For requirement 2(a), ask your parent
or guardian for your family’s water bills
for the past year. The bills will show
how many thousands of gallons of
water your family uses each
month and the cost for that
use. You can also evaluate
the changes in usage with
the seasons and examine
wastewater service charges
for treating the water that
goes down the drains in
your home.
Talk with your family
about how each person uses water. Do you leave the water on
the entire time you brush your teeth? Do you take 20-minute
showers? Do you run the water when you wash and rinse
dishes? Do you wash full loads of laundry or do you often throw
in your favorite pair of jeans by itself? How do you potentially
waste water?
Be honest about your habits and how hard it may be to
eliminate bad ones. Ask what each member of your family is
willing to do to reduce water use, and identify three ways you can
help reduce your use of water.
JAN 13, 2026
JAN 30, 2026
JAN 13, 2026
NAME SURNAME
000123
ZIPCODE
$ 130.22
$ -130.22
$ 0.00
$ 131.12
NOV 26, 2025 - DEC 23, 2025
NOV 26, 2025 - DEC 23, 2025
DEC-23-25
NOV-25-25
OCT-23-25
SEP-24-25
AUG-26-25
JUL-27-25
JUN-23-25
MAY-23-25
APR-25-25
MAR-24-25
FEB-21-25
JAN-27-25
DEC-20-25
JAN 13, 2026
NAME SURNAME
000123
ZIPCODE
$ 130.22
$ -130.22
$ 0.00
$ 131.12
NOV 26, 2025 - DEC 23, 2025
NOV 26, 2025 - DEC 23, 2025
DEC-23-25
NOV-25-25
OCT-23-25
SEP-24-25
AUG-26-25
JUL-27-25
JUN-23-25
MAY-23-25
APR-25-25
MAR-24-25
FEB-21-25
JAN-27-25
DEC-20-25
Turning off the water while you brush your teeth is one
of the easiest ways you can start saving water today—
about 8 gallons per day, or 2,920 gallons per year.
Encourage your family members to do the same, and
see what a difference it makes in your water bill. This
change of habit could save a family of four more than
11,000 gallons per year!


28 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainable Water Use.
How sustainable were you? Check your family’s water bill
to see whether you and your family have become wiser and
more thrifty about how you use a precious limited resource:
fresh water.
“Off the Grid” Doesn’t Mean “Free”
If you live in an apartment building or have a private water
well, your family may not be able to measure your water usage.
However, that doesn’t mean your water and wastewater
are “free.” It costs a great deal of money to dig a well. The
well must be dug deep enough to reach an underground water
source such as an aquifer. An aquifer is an underground layer of
water-saturated rock from which groundwater can be extracted
through a well. Aquifers can run dry or be contaminated from
pollutants such as fertilizers and chemical wastes.
In times of drought, groundwater levels often drop and
wells must be dug deeper to continue to reach the water source.
If you live close to the ocean and have a water well, it can also
become contaminated with seawater. Water withdrawal can
lower the water table enough to allow salty water to contaminate
the groundwater.
Besides the cost of digging a water well, there’s also the
expense of a pump and a holding tank for the clean water. Well
water is often full of minerals, which are hard on the pump, the
pipes that run the water through the house, and the hot-water
heater. All of these items cost money to maintain or replace.
If well water becomes undrinkable or the underground supply
is completely exhausted, you would have to find an alternate water
source. This can be expensive. Some towns in the United States
in the past few years have had to truck in water when their water
source dried up.
If you are on a septic system, wastewater from toilets,
showers, sinks, and laundry goes into a septic tank. The more
people in your household who are using water and creating
wastewater, the more often your septic tank may need to be
cleaned out. A company can be hired to pump out the tank
and truck the waste to a treatment facility. This service can cost
several hundred dollars each cleaning.
Fresh water is
limited to the
rain and snow
that has fallen
on Earth and the
reserves where
it has collected
such as lakes,
rivers, streams,
and underground
caverns.


SUSTAINABILITY 29
.Sustainable Water Use
In the absence of water-use regulations or monthly bills,
Scouts whose families live in apartment buildings or have
private water wells and septic tanks must make an even
more conscious choice to use water wisely. It comes down to
awareness of what you as an individual Scout and your family
can do to conserve a precious resource.
Where Does Your Water Come From?
Where Does It Go?
Your water may come from
a nearby river, a lake, or an
underground aquifer. Or the
source could be a long way
from where you live. If it is a
surface water source
(typically a lake or
reservoir), find out where
the water flows from, where
it is treated, and how it gets
from the treatment plant to
your house.
Also investigate where
water goes after it drains
from the kitchen sink,
bathroom basins, toilets,
shower or tub, and washing
machine. How far does
your home’s wastewater travel by pipe to a treatment plant?
Where does that treated wastewater go? Where does the outside
runoff go from watering the yard or washing the car?
You can usually find this information online at your official
city, municipal utility district, or groundwater district website. If
your source is an underground aquifer, find out more about the
particular aquifer you draw your water from.
If you live in a region that has experienced drought, find out
how dry conditions affect your source of water. If your water is
threatened by industrial pollution, saltwater contamination, or
commercial agricultural practices, make notes about what you
discover and share them with your counselor.
Water treatment facility


30 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainable Water Use.
Flooding
Flooding is a temporary overflow of water onto normally dry
land. It’s the most common natural disaster in the United States.
Floods result from rain, snow, coastal storms, storm
surge, and overflows of dams and other water systems. They
can develop slowly
or quickly; flash
floods can come with
no warning at all.
Outages, transportation
disruptions, damaged
buildings, landslides,
and erosion all can be
caused by floods. These
events can affect only a
few properties or up to
several states, displacing, hurting, or even killing people.
Scouts need to be prepared for flooding in many areas
where we camp, hike, and live.
• Protect your property from floodwaters and purchase flood
insurance.
• Plan for both sheltering where you are and
evacuating.
• Evacuate if told to do so.
• Seek high ground during flash floods or stay on high ground.
Do not camp in a flood zone.
• Avoid walking or driving in floodwaters. As the National
Weather Service advises: “Turn around, don’t drown.”
• The depth and speed of the floodwaters aren’t always
obvious; the ground or road might suddenly wash away,
and hidden dangers could exist. Do not attempt to
evacuate through flood waters.
• Know how to avoid injury from debris, contaminated water,
carbon monoxide
poisoning, electrocution, and damaged buildings and
infrastructure.
• Before entering buildings that have been flooded, seek a
professional review or inspection of structures and utilities
Droughts Across the World
Many regions have faced notable droughts in recent years,
including the Amazon, East Africa, Israel, and Australia.
A flash flood at Philmont Scout Ranch


SUSTAINABILITY 31
.Sustainable Water Use
In the United States, drought and accompanying water
shortages can occur anywhere—not just in dry regions. But
particularly the Southwest and the Midwest, prolonged drought,
depletion of underground water, and extensive wildfires have
damaged vast areas of the nation’s main “bread basket.” These
regions produce corn, wheat, and soybeans for our country and
many others.
Because of a long and widespread drought in the United
States from 2009 through 2013, nearly 80 percent of the
country’s corn crops and more than 11 percent of its soybean
crops were harmed. Food prices rose worldwide because of the
low yields and record high prices for grains. This drought led to
food shortages and hunger in places around the globe.
Then beginning around 2020, the Southwestern United
States had another multi-year drought. In 2022, California was
experiencing its most serious drought in 1,200 years, worsened
by climate change.
Concern is growing that prolonged heat spells and droughts
may become increasingly common. As the world population
grows, water may become more precious and expensive,
regardless of where you live.
Thanks to a multi-year drought in the Colorado River Basin,
Nevada’s Lake Mead dropped to just 27% of its capacity in 2022.





.Eating Sustainably
SUSTAINABILITY 33
Eating Sustainably
We must eat — hopefully, a nutritious diet that contributes to a
long and healthy life. We make dietary choices every day, and
many of those choices affect the sustainability of our world.
Where Our Food Comes From
Our food comes from many sources but generally has two main
categories:
• Plants: This includes fruits, vegetables, grains, legumes, nuts,
and seeds. Plants are grown on farms and fields around the
world, with some areas specializing in certain crops based on
climate and resources.
• Animals: This includes meat, poultry, fish, and animal
by-products such as eggs and dairy goods. Animals are raised
on farms and ranches or caught in fisheries.
Here’s a deeper dive into sourcing food from plants:
• Farms: The majority of our fruits, vegetables, and grains come
from farms. These farms can be large-scale commercial
operations, smaller family farms, or gardens.
• Growing methods: Plants can be grown using traditional
methods or organically, with a focus on avoiding synthetic
pesticides and fertilizers.
Today, indoor farming — often involving LED lights and
multiple levels in a warehouse — for salad greens and other
crops is increasing. Although it reduces land use and delivery
impact (because the food is grown closer to the consumer),
indoor farming can increase energy use and have other
sustainability issues.
The traditional greenhouse (a glass or plastic structure) is
going high-tech, using lighting with wavelengths optimized
for individual crops, hydroponics (grown without soil), and
data analytics that can improve both crop yields and nutritional
quality.
More than
60 percent of
food waste could
be avoided.


34 SUSTAINABILITY
Eating Sustainably.
• Improved crops and practices: Almost every plant we grow is
a hybrid or a genetically modified organism. These are often
more nutritious, tastier, and more productive per unit of land
than the original species. Agricultural practices have also
improved yields and reduced irrigation and the amounts of
pesticides and fertilizers applied to farmlands. The result has
been successfully producing enough food for a growing
population, but we have more to do for a sustainable world.
• Precision agriculture: This uses technology like GPS,
sensors, and data analytics to optimize farm operations
and resource use. For example, drone technology can apply
pesticides to crops only where needed.
• Global trade: Many fruits and vegetables are grown in
specific regions with ideal climates. International trade allows
us to enjoy a wider variety of produce throughout the year.
However, the environmental impact of the transportation can
be high.
• Sustainability: We can preserve topsoil, reduce synthetic
pesticides and fertilizers, and grow food closer to the
consumer to reduce transportation impacts.
Here’s a closer look at sourcing food from animals:
• Farms and ranches: Livestock animals like cattle, pigs, and
poultry are raised on farms and ranches. These farms can vary
An agricultural drone flies over a field of plants used to make canola oil.


SUSTAINABILITY 35
.Eating Sustainably
in size and management practices. Raising livestock requires a
lot of land and water.
• Fisheries: Fish and shellfish come from capture fisheries, in
which the animals are caught naturally in oceans, lakes, and
rivers; or from aquaculture, which involves raising fish in
controlled
environments. Many
species are threatened
by overfishing.
• Improved livestock
and practices: Raising
livestock is a big,
complex business.
Animals are bred for
their nutritional value,
taste, and quality.
Many cattle are transported to different facilities as they grow,
and they’re often fattened up in crowded feed lots. Many
chickens are raised in massive buildings, where they never see
the outside. These practices keep our food costs lower but
often raise concerns about the environmental impact and
animal welfare.
• Sustainability: Solutions to address environmental concerns
are growing. Sustainable practices and alternative protein
sources are being explored, including cultured meat, where the
meat is grown in a controlled environment(like a laboratory).
Food Purity
Until the early 1900s, the U.S. marketplace was flooded with
low-quality, often harmful products. With almost no government
controls, unscrupulous manufacturers tampered with products,
substituting cheap ingredients for those represented on labels.
For instance, honey was diluted with glucose syrup; olive
oil was made with cottonseed; and “soothing syrups” given to
babies were laced with morphine. People died. Activists fought
for pure food and drugs. We now have government oversight,
While most folks want to make environmentally
responsible choices, research shows that it’s difficult
for people to “go green” unless it saves them money.
Changing consumer habits is a big challenge.


36 SUSTAINABILITY
Eating Sustainably.
notably the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, that controls the
purity of our food and keeps us healthy.
A Sustainable Food Supply Chain
A food supply chain refers to the stages it takes to get food from
its source to the people who eat it. The supply chain from your
garden is very short. But even locally grown food must be
transported from a farm to a market, then transported to your
home to be refrigerated, frozen, or otherwise stored.
Avocados. Most of our avocados come from Mexico and
must be kept cold during transport to a distribution center by
trucks, ships, or airplanes. Refrigerated trucks deliver them to
your grocer. Spoilage is a threat; thus, the entire supply chain
coordinates using artificial intelligence and advanced analytics
to optimize the transportation and timing.
Processed foods. Processed food is any food that’s been
changed from its natural form, often by adding things like sugar,
salt, or preservatives — and they involve even more complex
supply chains. For example, canned soup involves many stages.
The ingredients (vegetables, meat, broth, etc.) must be sourced,


SUSTAINABILITY 37
.Eating Sustainably
then chopped, cooked, and prepared according to the recipe.
The cans must be sterilized before filling, sealing, labeling, and
boxing. The cases of soup are then transported to a warehouse
or distribution center until they’re taken to grocery stores,
restaurants, or other destinations. Individual cans are stocked on
shelves for you to purchase.
Similar supply chains feed operate all over the world.
Transportation, preservation, and processing differ across
regions, but the people involved strive to deliver enough food
safely to feed us all.
Inventory management is critical: too much and you have
overflowing stockrooms; too little and you have bare shelves.
And many crops are seasonal, so our food system must adjust
for the availability of ingredients. Supply chains are so complex,
it’s amazing that for most people, food is readily available and
affordable.
It’s a complex process to balance sustainability with
costs, spoilage, seasonality, and many other competing factors.
But the world needs a sustainable system to feed all 8 billion
of us. That’s why we’re increasingly sourcing ingredients
from responsible farms,
using recyclable packaging
materials, and minimizing
waste throughout the complex
processes that put food on our
tables.
Ground beef. Whether you
eat a hamburger at home or a
restaurant, the beef has made its
way through a complex supply
chain. It travels from the ranch to the slaughterhouse to a meat-
packing plant, where some of the beef is ground and controlled
for fat content. The ground beef is then packaged, shipped to
a distribution hub, then transported to your local market or
restaurant. As with avocados, temperature control and timing
are critical throughout the process.
Never go to a grocery store when you’re hungry, or
you’ll be tempted to buy things you don’t need. Take
your shopping list with you and stick to it.


38 SUSTAINABILITY
Eating Sustainably.
Factors That Limit World Food Supplies
Producing and delivering enough food to feed the world’s
people is a serious challenge. The world population grew from 1
billion in 1800 to more than 8 billion today. The United Nations
predicts Earth will reach 9.8 billion people by 2050.
Globalization, especially in the past century, has expanded
food trade, increasing the quality and variety of foods available
to us. But it raises sustainability issues with food security,
food safety, and shortages in many areas. Today only a few
grow what they need. During the mid 20th century, high-yield
crops and energy-intensive farming practices led to dramatic
increases in crop production. Except for parts of Africa, grain
yields exceeded population growth in those days. But now, grain
production struggles to keep pace as the world’s population
increases.
As many as 1 billion people in the world today are
undernourished and live with hunger. Many more are
malnourished and suffer growth and health issues.
High-yield crops, which produce more usable product
per acre of land compared to traditional varieties, come
from hybridization and, more recently, genetically modified
organisms.
Crop hybridization is the process of combining the genetic
material of two different parent plants to create offspring with
desired traits (the hybrids). This technique has been used for


SUSTAINABILITY 39
.Eating Sustainably
centuries to improve crop production, resist disease, and other
create other good qualities in crops.
Genetically modified plants are plants that scientists have
changed by adjusting their genes to give them special traits.
These plants might be resistant to bugs, not need as much
water, or grow bigger and faster.
Although it’s been called the “Green Revolution,” the
energy-intensive farming that feeds the world depends on
agricultural practices that many consider to be unsustainable.
These practices include heavy use of fossil fuels for fertilizers,
pesticides, and irrigation, along with designing plants that can
tolerate high levels of fertilizers and pesticides to increase the
harvest. The energy-intensive farming led to soil erosion and
water pollution, and sped up the depletion of groundwater and
surface water resources.
Other unwanted environmental
and public health consequences have
arisen from the widespread use of
chemical pesticides and herbicides.
Worldwide, crop research centers are
now studying how to make large-
scale commercial agriculture more
sustainable.
Limited land that is suitable for agriculture, soil
contamination and erosion, dwindling water for irrigation, and
pollution of water sources all play parts in the world’s ability to
grow enough food for the present and the future.
Discuss with your counselor some of these factors that limit
the availability of food and food production in various regions of
the world. How do these factors influence the sustainability of
worldwide food supplies?
One way to make a change
and have a positive impact on
ecological overshoot (see page
88) is to reduce waste. Does your
family tend to throw out a lot of
leftovers or uneaten food, such
as fresh fruits and vegetables? If
so, plan better and buy less. Purchase only what your
family will consume.
In the mid-20th
century, Norman
Borlaug, “the
father of the Green
Revolution,”
received a Nobel
Peace Prize for his
work. His hybrids
saved a billion
people from star-
vation.


40 SUSTAINABILITY
Eating Sustainably.
Reducing Food Waste
As avid campers and backcountry stewards, Scouts are skilled at
planning meals right down to the exact portion size each member
of a troop will need for three squares a day while trekking into
the great outdoors. Scouts come prepared but don’t want to carry
in or pack out anything more than what is needed.
Food and especially water weigh down backpacks. Troop trips
are also less expensive when food costs are kept to a minimum and
the expense is shared. These are just two of many reasons Scouts
carefully plan their meals and the weight they’ll be carrying before
each campout.
Household food waste, however, can be another matter
entirely. When you have a refrigerator and maybe a freezer and
a pantry or cupboards to store food and drinks, items that do not
get eaten often go to waste.
The average U.S. household throws away about 300 pounds
(more than $1,100) of edible food each year. It’s the single
largest component of municipal solid waste that ends up in
landfills and incinerators. We can all do more to reduce food
waste. The more disposable income people in a country have
to spend, the more food they waste. In industrialized countries,
each individual throws away an average of 200 to 250 pounds
of food per year. Compare those hefty figures with sub-Saharan
Africa and South/Southeast Asia where individuals throw out
only 13 to 24 pounds of food per year.


SUSTAINABILITY 41
.Eating Sustainably
People are not only tossing away money but also
contributing to the production of methane—a greenhouse gas
that is a big concern for the future of the planet—as the food
breaks down in landfills. Also wasted are the energy, water,
labor, and other costs that go into growing, processing, and
transporting food from farmers and factories to consumers.
Making the best use of household food comes down to
learning good management techniques to cut your food bills and
food waste, much as Scouts do when camping out.
Composting: It’s Everyone’s Responsibility
Compost is organic matter that has been recycled into a natural
fertilizer and a soil improver. It is a key ingredient in organic
farming. Considering we throw away as much as a third of the
food we buy each week, reusing it in compost is a valuable way
to give back to the environment and save money.
What are the benefits of turning food waste into compost?
To start with, it’s a source of free, chemical-free fertilizer for
your plants. It’s also good for the environment because it
reduces landfill waste and lowers greenhouse gas emissions.
Plus, it’s easy to make!
Making composting easier for people to do is a step
governments, restaurants, and other companies are beginning to
take to keep food waste out of landfills.
More than 60% of
food waste could
be avoided.
Compostable waste collection programs are becoming
more common in the United States, but they aren’t
available everywhere. Check your local government’s
website to see if your town has a program.


42 SUSTAINABILITY
Eating Sustainably.
How to Compost
If you live in an apartment and have only houseplants, you might
choose a kitchen-counter compost bin. If you live in the country
and have a garden, lawn, shrubs, and trees, you can start a large
compost pile that will enrich the soil on your family’s land.
Here are suggestions for how to build a compost pile outdoors:
1.Build the pile on bare earth so that worms and other beneficial
organisms can get into the compost to aerate it.
2. Spread twigs or loose straw on the ground a few inches deep
to aid drainage and let air
into the pile.
3. Add compostable materials
in layers, alternating moist
ingredients (food scraps,
tea bags, etc.) with dry
materials (leaves, sawdust,
wood ashes). Sprinkle wood
ashes thinly
to keep them from
clumping together.
4. Add manure, clover,
buckwheat, wheatgrass,
or any nitrogen source to
help speed the composting
process.
5. Keep the compost moist,
not saturated. When rainfall
is scarce, water the pile but
do not soak it.
6. Cover the pile with plastic sheeting, wood, carpet scraps, or
anything that will serve to hold in moisture and heat, two
things that are essential for composting.
7. Every few weeks, remove the cover and turn the pile with
a pitchfork or shovel to introduce more oxygen, which is
needed for the composting process to work.
With your parent or guardian’s permission, go online to find out
more about composting, or get tips from local nurseries. Many
cities and county extension services also offer free classes in
composting.
Food needs light and air to
compost properly. In a landfill,
it gets neither.
For more
composting tips,
see the Gardening
merit badge
pamphlet.GARDENING


SUSTAINABILITY 43
.Eating Sustainably
Tips to Reduce Food Waste
Here are some ways you can reduce food waste, help
to protect the environment, and save money.
• Sit down with whoever does the grocery shopping in your
household. Plan family meals for one week, including
breakfast, lunch, dinner, snacks, and drinks. Pay attention to
portion sizes. How much of each item on your list do you
need?
• Check to see which ingredients you already have. If your
family buys in bulk, meats and vegetables (and meals
prepared ahead of time for those nights when there’s too
much going on to cook) can be frozen in meal-size portions.
• Don’t toss leftovers — eat them tomorrow! Add leftover
veggies to soup or leftover meat to a casserole.
Some food waste will happen, no matter what you do. If you set
up a compost bin, in a few months you’ll have valuable compost
for plants. A kitchen composter called a bokashi bin works for
cooked food waste, even fish and meat. You feed it your scraps,
sprinkle over a layer of special microbes, and leave it to ferment.
Houseplants and gardens love this broken-down enriched
substance.
What You Can Compost
Compostable materials
include table scraps, fruit and
vegetable scraps, eggshells,
leaves, grass clippings,
garden plants, flowers, lawn
and garden weeds, shrub
prunings, straw, hay, pine
needles, seaweed, wood
ash, chicken manure, coffee
grounds and filters, tea leaves, newspaper, shredded
paper, shredded cardboard, corn cobs, dryer lint,
sawdust pellets, and wood chips.


44 SUSTAINABILITY
Eating Sustainably.
Creating Your Own Food Sources
Growing your food, or purchasing fresh fruits and vegetables
from local sources when possible, has many benefits. You have
better control over what is used on your food for fertilizer and
pest control, and once a garden is in place your family can grow
a variety of foods that do well in your particular region,
depending on the season.
Nearly every county in the U.S. has an agricultural
extension agent who’s typically affiliated with a nearby
university. These agents help with gardening and food
conservation by providing free information and assistance
on gardening, agriculture, nutrition, food science, and
environmental stewardship. Find your agent’s contact
information by searching “[your county] extension” or similar
search terms.
Sustainable Gardening
Gardening is a favorite leisure activity in America, with over
half of U.S. homes maintaining a garden that provides fresh,
healthy produce and saves money on groceries. Beyond the
home, community gardens are increasingly popular urban assets.
These shared spaces provide a vital place for people to come
together to work side by side, grow food, educate young people,
instill community pride, and reduce pesticide exposure, all while
Many cities are turning
unused land into urban
garden spaces. Land
used for gardens not
only offers an excellent
use for otherwise
vacant spaces, but also
beautifies areas that
might otherwise be
places of blight
and trash dumping.
How might
local gardens
contribute to a
more sustainable
way of life if
practiced
globally?


SUSTAINABILITY 45
.Eating Sustainably
beautifying neighborhoods and
increasing local property values.
For example, the Central
Bainbridge Street Community
Garden in Brooklyn, New York,
produces thousands of pounds
of vegetables a year. It is also a
center of activity for young and
old in the large community it
serves.
City rooftops have been
turned into garden spaces, too.
Residents who live in buildings
with rooftop gardens save
their vegetable and fruit peelings for a community compost bin.
The compost is spread around the plants to make the soil more
nutrient rich.
Organic farmers who live in rural areas may raise cows,
pigs, chickens, and other livestock on grazing land to provide
consumers with natural meats, free-range chicken, and fresh
eggs. The manure the animals make is used as natural fertilizer
to grow organic gardens.
Backyard and Balcony Gardens
A backyard garden can provide much of the fresh produce
your family needs in a small plot. Even a container garden
grown in 12- to 15-inch-
deep pots on a sunny porch
or apartment balcony can
produce generous results.
Check with your county
extension agent to learn more
about gardening in your area.
Knowing when and what
to plant for the season and
your region is important for
successful gardening.
Fruits and
vegetables fresh
out of the garden
are hard to
beat for taste
and nutrition.





.Designing Sustainable Communities
SUSTAINABILITY 47
Designing Sustainable
Communities
Before you sketch out how you would design a sustainable
community, you may want to research some of the world’s most
sustainable cities to help you with your own plan.
For example, Reykjavik, Iceland, a city with about 140,000
residents, gets energy for hot water, electricity, and heat entirely
from hydropower and geothermal sources. Both sources are
free of greenhouse gas emissions and are renewable energy;
that is, they are replaced by natural processes. (See “Achieving
Sustainable Energy” in this pamphlet for more about hydropower,
geothermal, and other energy sources.) Some buses and vehicles
in Reykjavik run on hydrogen. Iceland plans to entirely end its
dependence on fossil fuels by 2050 and become a hydrogen, solar,
wind, and geothermal society.
Vancouver, Canada, has also embraced renewable energy.
Vancouver is already No. 1 in the world in using hydroelectric
energy, which provides 90 percent of its power. The city also
plans to drastically reduce greenhouse gas emissions through
investments in solar, wave, and wind energy systems. This “city
within a rainforest” prioritizes preserving park space, greenways,
and urban forests, providing residents with access to nature and
contributing to a healthy environment.
Portland, Oregon, has been a
sustainable-living model city for years.
Urban planners have set aside 92,000
acres of green space with over 400 miles
of bike/hike trails, and created an urban-
growth boundary to contain the city and
protect outlying farms and 25 million
acres of forestland. Portland is the first
U.S. city to enact a plan to reduce its
greenhouse gas emissions and get 100 percent of its energy from
renewable sources. Hundreds of buildings in Portland exceed the
SUSTAINABILITY 47


48 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
U.S. Green Building Council’s standards for sustainability. The
city was one of the first to adopt policies promoting sustainable
construction, leading to this high concentration of green-certified
buildings.
Camp Emerald Bay:
Scouts Tackle Sustainability
Located on the remote west end of Santa Catalina Island,
California, Camp Emerald Bay is operated by Scouting America’s
Western Los Angeles Council.
This is the home of the near-
threatened island scrub-jay, the
threatened Catalina Island fox
and Catalina California ground
squirrel, and many federally endangered plants. With less than
16 inches of rain falling per year on the island, water is scarce
and there is a high risk of fire. Scouting leaders felt it was
essential to protect the island’s natural resources.
Water Conservation
In 2009, Camp Emerald Bay began shrinking its environmental
footprint. First, it reduced water consumption by replacing high-
use water fixtures with lower-flow models. Then the cap
adopted other water-saving methods:
Drip irrigation. Plants receive direct, precise amounts of water.
Water is no longer lost to the air or to unnecessary plants as
with traditional sprinkler systems.
Water meters. Water meters measure the amount of water
going into a building. The camp’s network of meters reveals
where, when, and how much water is consumed. Some meters
can be read in real time, immediately identifying problems
such as running toilets or broken pipes. The real-time monitoring
also sends an email alert any time water use is above a
certain threshold.
Pressure-assist toilets. These units need only 1.0 gallon per
flush, using air pressure to push water through the bowl
Waterless urinals. These use no water, helping to save thousands
of gallons, and the novelty has made them popular with campers.


.Designing Sustainable Communities
SUSTAINABILITY 49
Water Conservation Results
The water conservation efforts have helped Camp Emerald Bay
save more than 1.5 million gallons per year, or use 50 percent
less water than was used in 2006.
Besides saving water, the changes have brought other
benefits, including:
Improved health of native plant species. With a drip irrigation
system delivering precise amounts of water to each plant, native
vegetation has flourished.
Improved leach fields. All drains in the camp lead to septic
tanks, which treat the water and release it into vegetated areas
known as leach fields. The elimination of salt-based water
softeners has reduced the salty brine from the septic system and
produced better soil in the leach fields.
Camp Emerald Bay garden


50 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
Reduction in propane usage. Using less water for showering
means less propane is required to heat the water. In addition,
switching to on-demand water heaters that heat water only when it
is needed has cut the consumption of propane and the release of
9.36 metric tons of carbon dioxide each year.
Protection of the natural aquifer. Fresh water on the island
comes from an underground
aquifer that currently flows
out to sea. If too much
water were to be used, that
underground river could be
diminished enough to
reverse the direction of flow,
allowing saltwater intrusion.
Increased awareness. Most importantly, Scouts at Camp
Emerald Bay have become more conservation-minded.
Conserving water and practicing environmental stewardship
are now camp standards.
Sustainable Housing and Green Building
Along with water conservation, Camp Emerald Bay has explored
sustainable housing options. The Scouts teamed up with an
architectural firm to create its Eco-Cabin. The structure was
built using reclaimed wood from a pier, two old 20-foot shipping
containers, a rubber floor, and aluminum arches to suspend a
silicone-coated roof. A small solar panel outside provides power
to the eight LED lights inside the structure. Today, the Eco-Cabin
serves as an education center to demonstrate sustainable design
and principles of outdoor ethics, and it is used as a classroom for
merit badge instruction.
Through the efficient use of resources, Camp Emerald Bay
has constructed various spaces out of recycled material. The
Scoutcraft area was built with materials from a pier, dock floats,
and railroad ties. The obstacles for a Leadership Reaction Course
were constructed from the roof of the dining hall. A bridge
across an intermittent stream and parts of a garden were built
from the pier.


SUSTAINABILITY 51
.Designing Sustainable Communities
Energy Conservation
Energy conservation continues beyond the Eco-Cabin.
Lighting replacements. Incandescent bulbs have been replaced
with compact fluorescent lamp (CFL) or LED lights, which use
much less electricity. Motion-sensor timers have been installed
in the bathroom facilities, dining hall, and maintenance yard.
Energy Smart meters. Monitoring energy consumption in real
time helps identify where energy is being used and the peak
times for energy consumption. The monitoring system sends an
alert when energy use reaches a certain threshold.
Waste, Recycling, and Compost
A waste audit found that only 27 percent of what was put in
the trash bin actually belonged in the trash bin. The other
73 percent was either recyclable or compostable. To reduce the
amount of trash, recycling and composting programs are now
part of daily life at Camp Emerald Bay.
Recycling. Glass bottles, aluminum cans, and plastic bottles
make up 26 percent of the camp’s trash. Instead of being thrown
out, these items are collected in recycling bins located in every
campsite, cabin, and building in camp.


52 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
Composting. Through the composting program, the camp also
recycles fruits, vegetables, and grains. These items, along with
leaves, wood chips, and discarded paper, are sent to compost
bins to be processed daily.
During summer camp, nearly 150 gallons of compostable
material is processed every day in the camp’s garden. With
proper aeration (supplied with air), food decomposes within
a few days and transforms into a rich soil called humus that
retains moisture and nutrients. This soil is added to the native
clay soil to grow fruits, vegetables, and native plants in the
garden and around camp.
Through the composting program, the food waste generated at
Camp Emerald Bay turns into a usable product that enriches the
soil and reduces the need for water, fertilizers, and pesticides.


SUSTAINABILITY 53
.Designing Sustainable Communities
These programs cut the number of times the camp’s trash
must be hauled across the Gulf of Santa Catalina, reducing
pollution and extending municipal landfill life. Another benefit
of waste reduction is that animals are less prone to scavenge
through the trash to find food. This keeps trash from being
scattered and also protects animals from accidental harm.
With initiatives such as these, Camp Emerald Bay sets a
pattern for sustainability and strives to protect Catalina Island
for future generations.
The reclaimed “landship” at Camp Emerald Bay serves as a
unique meeting place for Scoutcraft activities.
“Upcycling” is converting waste materials or useless
items into new materials or items of better value.


54 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
Every time a
glass or plastic
bottle is put in
a recycling bin,
natural resources
are conserved
and greenhouse
gas emissions
are reduced.
Sustainable Building Materials
At the heart of sustainable construction are the three R’s of
green living: reduce, reuse, recycle. Inside and out,
energy efficiency is built in to environmentally
sound buildings.
When ordering wood for a sustainable
home, for example, you would look for
wood products certified under the Sustainable
Forestry Initiative (SFI) and purchase wood that
is generated locally. This reduces shipping costs and saves the
energy of shipping wood from a faraway location.
Green Building Initiative’s Green Globes program and the
rating tools of the U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED (Leadership
in Environmental and Energy Design) certified sustainable home
program have set high standards of sustainable design and
development practices for land developers, architects, engineers,
real estate professionals, and others who are interested in
sustainable construction.
SFI is the largest forest certification program in North
America and the largest single forest certification
standard. Philmont Scout Ranch is certified to the
SFI Standard. Scout Life magazine is printed on
paper certified by SFI’s global Programme for the
Endorsement of Forest Certification (PEFC), and the
magazine displays the PEFC label in every issue.
Merit badge pamphlets
also are printed on SFI-
certified paper.
The programs rate building projects based on construction site
selection, water and energy efficiency, materials used, and indoor
environmental quality. It’s a shorthand way for a buyer to quickly
tell if a building is sustainable. An established grading system
provides a clear target in our move toward sustainability.


SUSTAINABILITY 55
.Designing Sustainable Communities
Listed below are some of the materials and techniques that
are recognized in sustainable construction:
• Plywood processed
without formaldehyde
• Installation of large energy-
efficient windows that provide
fresh air and natural light
• Installation of energy- and water-
efficient appliances
• Installation of low-emitting
volatile organics carpeting
• Use of low-volatile-organic
compounds (VOC) paint
• Use of reused or recycled
construction materials when
possible
• Building within walking distance
of many basic services
• Selection of a building site that is
not on prime farmland,
in a floodplain, on threatened animal habitat, or too close
to wetlands
• Prevention of pollution on the construction site
• Space provided for recyclable collection and storage
• Establishment of a minimum level of indoor air quality
• Building near alternative transportation
Which of these factors are present in your home? Which
could you apply if your family renovates your home or builds a
new one? Share what you learn with your counselor.
How Communities Assess Housing Needs
Cities and towns throughout the country conduct “housing needs
assessments” to determine the need for affordable housing. With
your parent or guardian’s permission, go online or visit a public
library to look at a current housing needs assessment for your
town, city, county, or state.
Tax breaks and incentives are available for green building and vary
from state to state and sometimes by city. The Database of State
Incentives for Renewables and Efficiency (DSIRE) keeps a database
online where you can find out about these incentives in your area.


56 SUSTAINABILITY
Designing Sustainable Communities.
Looking at a housing needs assessment will give you a better
understanding of the need for rental housing, affordable homes,
senior housing, and special-needs housing in your community. A
housing needs assessment also helps to identify issues that may
need to be addressed such as urban blight or foreclosure.
In this way, cities determine whether proposed development
projects meet the community’s needs and should be high priority.
A housing needs assessment is a first step in planning how, when,
and where to address local housing issues so that priorities can be
set, resources identified, and strategies chosen.
City planners and interested groups might ask the
following questions:
• Who can afford to live in this community?
• Does our community provide quality housing to a wide range
of residents?
• Can our children afford to remain in, or return to, the
community as they start their own careers and households?
• Can those people who provide essential services to the
community—such as firefighters, law enforcement officers,
healthcare workers, and others—afford to live here?
• Do people with special needs have adequate housing options?
• Are there substandard, overcrowded, or other undesirable
living conditions that should be addressed?
• Do our elderly residents have adequate housing for remaining
in the community as they age?
• Do we provide the type of housing that promotes local
job growth?
• Are there significant local housing trends such as an increase
in absentee landlords, mortgage foreclosures, increasing
housing prices, or decreasing home values?
“Needs” categories you may want to research include
affordable rental housing, home ownership, senior housing,
and special-needs housing.
Think about how you would design the housing, work
locations, shops, schools, and transportation systems
to build a sustainable community for the future.
How would you redesign your town or community
for sustainability?


SUSTAINABILITY 57
.Designing Sustainable Communities
Toward a Circular Economy
The circular economy focuses on minimizing waste by keeping
resources in use. Unlike the “take-make-waste” model, it
emphasizes extending product life cycles through reuse,
remanufacturing, and recycling.
Here are some key principles of the circular economy:
• Eliminate waste and pollution: Designing products that are
durable, repairable, and easy to recycle minimizes waste
generation and reduces environmental impact.
• Circulate products and materials: Extending the life cycle of
products through reuse, remanufacturing, and recycling keeps
materials in use longer.
• Regenerate nature: Sustainable practices throughout the
product of the life cycle minimize environmental damage and
promote the restoration of natural resources.
By embracing circularity, we can create a more sustainable
future.





SUSTAINABILITY 59
.Achieving Sustainable Energy
Achieving Sustainable
Energy
The Earth’s 8 billion people need energy. The more developed
countries, like the United States, use a lot of energy to grow
food, construct buildings, move themselves and “stuff,” heat
and cool homes, and power electronic devices. All that power
has to come from energy sources.
Some energy sources are more sustainable than others, but
no single source is ideal. Every energy decision involves trade-
offs. Every source requires materials and infrastructure that have
environmental impact.
You’re now set to learn about the sustainability of different
energy sources and what the term carbon footprint means.
Here is a list of the terms you will find in this section and a
brief definition of each of these forms of energy.


60 SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving Sustainable Energy.
Fossil fuels, such as petroleum, coal, and natural gas,
come from the accumulated remains of ancient plants and
animals. Burning fossil fuels releases carbon dioxide and other
greenhouse gases, which are considered by many to be among
the primary causes of global climate change.
Solar energy is the energy received
by Earth from the sun in the form
of solar radiation, which makes the
production of solar electricity possible.
Solar power is renewable. But harvesting
it occupies land and requires mining raw
materials.
Nuclear power is produced by a
fission reaction that splits the uranium
nucleus, creating heat. The heat is used to turn water into
steam; the steam drives a turbine, spinning a generator to
produce electricity. Although nuclear energy is carbon-free, the
toxic waste created by used or depleted uranium is difficult to
dispose
of safely.
Wind power is the conversion
of wind energy into usable forms of
energy through windmills for mechanical
power, wind pumps for water pumping
or drainage, and wind turbines to make
electrical power. Wind energy is renewable
and clean and produces no greenhouse
gas emissions, but some people find wind
turbines unsightly or noisy.
Hydropower, or water power,
comes from the energy of falling and
running water, which can be harnessed
for useful purposes such as operating
aluminum mills, powering computer-
server farms, and generating electricity.
Hydropower is a renewable energy
source, but damming rivers to access it
severely disrupts that ecosystem.
Geothermal power comes from the heat of Earth’s core.
Hot spring water can be brought to Earth’s surface and used to
heat homes and buildings. Geothermal power generates clean,
renewable electricity.


SUSTAINABILITY 61
.Achieving Sustainable Energy
Its sources are mainly concentrated in the “Ring of Fire,”
a volcanic region with large geothermal reservoirs located
around the Pacific Ocean. Geothermal power is cost-effective
and sustainable, although bringing the heat to Earth’s surface
does emit small quantities of greenhouse gases.
Bioenergy is generated from biomass: trees, crops, algae,
animal dung, or plant material that is left over from agricultural
and forestry operations.
Everyone Makes a Carbon Footprint
Your carbon footprint is the total amount of carbon dioxide
(CO2) that you create. The bigger your footprint, the less green
your lifestyle is. When you burn fossil fuels like gasoline in
your family car or heating oil to warm your house, carbon
dioxide is released.
Unless your family lives “off the power grid” (that is, you
don’t rely on a power company for electricity), the electricity used
in your home creates the biggest part of your carbon footprint.
Although electricity does not make greenhouse gases when
you use it in your home, most of the power plants that generate
electricity do, by burning fossil fuels.
Using fuels like oil, natural gas, or coal-generated electricity
to heat or cool your home add to your carbon footprint. How
you adjust the thermostat and what type of fuel you use make a
difference in the amount of CO2 produced.
Cars, buses, trains, and planes that run on fossil fuels also
produce CO2. Household garbage is a culprit, too, if it isn’t
composted. For every pound of trash you throw in the garbage,
one pound of greenhouse gases is created because trash over
time produces CO2 and methane.
Many websites provide ways to figure out the size
of your carbon footprint. Get a parent or guardian’s
permission before using one of these “carbon
calculators,” because you will need to answer questions
about where you live, the type of home you live in,
how much electricity you use, and how often your
family uses a car.


62 SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving Sustainable Energy.
How to Shrink Your Carbon Footprint
By using less fuel and less electricity and reducing the amount
of trash you create, you can reduce your carbon footprint
dramatically. Start by turning off computers, televisions, and
lights when you are not using them. Unplug small appliances
and phone chargers, etc., when they are not in use. Lower the
temperature in your home to 68 degrees or lower in winter, and
raise it to 78 degrees or higher when running an air conditioner
in summer. Turn off your heat or air conditioner entirely and
open screened windows for natural ventilation when the weather
is comfortable.
Here are more tips for reducing your carbon footprint:
Buy local and buy organic. When possible, buy organic or
“fair trade.” There’s a better chance the food was grown in
an eco-friendly way. Food grown locally doesn’t
have to be transported far, which saves fuel, reduces
the carbon footprint, and supports the local
economy. Eat at restaurants that serve locally
produced or seasonal foods.
Keep packaging to a minimum. For example,
choose loose vegetables instead of boxed or plastic-
wrapped ones. Take reusable cloth tote bags to the
grocery store.
Don’t buy bottled water. Bottled water creates a huge carbon
footprint. And it is often shipped long distances. Refill a reusable
water bottle instead.
Take steps to make your home energy-efficient. The attic
should be insulated, windows need to close properly, and heating
and air-conditioning systems should be properly maintained. If
possible, switch to reusable air filters instead of disposable filters.
Switch from incandescent to compact fluorescent or LED light
bulbs. These use less electricity and last longer. They are more
expensive to purchase, but they will pay for themselves over time
in reduced energy costs.
Switch to native plants. Wherever you live, there are plants
that are native to your region. These will grow better and take
less water in most cases than nonnative species. Choose plants
Close window
drapes to keep
heat out in
summer, and open
the drapes to let
in the warm sun
in wintertime.


SUSTAINABILITY 63
.Achieving Sustainable Energy
and create gardens that help the ecosystem by, for instance,
attracting butterflies and other pollinators. Green plants are an
excellent way to offset carbon. Planting anything helps the
environment.
Practice being thrifty. To help you buy only the things you
truly need, avoid impulse buying. Every item you purchase
has a footprint, so when you curb your urge to spend money
on items, you are reducing your individual carbon footprint
and our nation’s overall footprint. Some people call this
“precycling.” If you don’t buy stuff, no “recycling” is necessary.
Switch your water heater to vacation mode when you go
away. In “vacation” or “away” mode, a water heater does not
keep a tank full of hot water ready when you don’t need it.
Newer tankless models heat water only when it’s needed, making
them far more energy efficient than standard water heaters.
Pull the plug. If you don’t use an appliance frequently, unplug
it. The same goes for cellphone chargers, laptops, televisions,
stereos, toasters, coffee pots, hair dryers, and other electronics.
Many devices continue to use energy even when they appear to
be turned off. If you use a power strip for a group of electronic
devices, you can flip one switch and disconnect them from the
power all at once.
Keep your car as long as it runs well. Rising gas prices do not
mean you should rush to buy a hybrid or an electric vehicle. If
your older car still runs well, keep it, and keep it well tuned-up.
Hybrids and electric vehicles create a huge footprint when they
are built, so consider driving a well-maintained older car for a
while longer. Use more eco-friendly forms of transport—buses,
light rail, bicycle—and walk or carpool whenever possible.
Choose fresh over frozen. Frozen dinners are energy-intensive
to produce. It takes energy to freeze foods, ship them cold,
display them frozen in the grocery store, and keep them frozen
in the home freezer. Try to eat fresh food when you can, and
avoid frozen foods that must be zapped in the microwave.
Use cold water to wash clothes. It takes lots of energy to heat
water. Modern laundry detergents are chemically designed to
Reduce your
food waste by
shopping and
cooking wisely,
and you’ll also
reduce the
size of your
carbon footprint.


64 SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving Sustainable Energy.
clean your clothes in cold water. It costs 4 cents per cold-water
load compared to 68 cents per hot-water load. That adds up to a
family savings of $60 to $200 a year while reducing your carbon
emissions.
Combine errands to save trips in the car. “Trip chaining”
reduces pollution and traffic congestion and helps prevent
wasting time and fuel. You and your family members probably
already combine errands. Plan ahead to trip chain more.
Remember the Three R’s: Reduce, Reuse, Recycle! Buy less,
reuse and fix things when you can instead of buying new, and
recycle as much as you can at home and at school.
Upcycle too: Repurpose things into useful and fun new items.
You can create your own wrapping paper from the comic pages
of a newspaper. An empty jar becomes a leftover container. A
worn-out T-shirt becomes a dust rag.
Think about how you and your family can reduce your carbon
footprint. Discuss with your counselor what you’ve learned
about how each energy source affects the environment, what
the term “carbon footprint” means, and what your family can
do to reduce your impact on Earth.
Lowering Household Utility Bills
In addition to the other tips provided in this pamphlet, consider
these ideas for lowering your family’s utility bills.
• Seal cracks around doors and windows to cut energy costs by
an estimated 15 to 30 percent. Caulk and weather-stripping are
inexpensive to buy.
• Properly insulate attic spaces. In cold climates, install storm or
double-paned windows.
• Use heat-generating appliances like the oven, clothes dryer, and
dishwasher at night when it is cooler outside. Running these
appliances during the heat of the day in summer forces the air
conditioner to work harder to keep a home comfortable.
• Shift your electricity consumption to non-peak hours
(generally late evening and night). Smart appliances can be
programmed to operate when demand is lower and electricity
costs less. You save money, and communities lower their
electric infrastructure needs.


SUSTAINABILITY 65
.Achieving Sustainable Energy
• Use a slow cooker to cook some meals each week. Slow cookers
use less energy than cooking in pans on the stovetop, and they do
not heat up a house the way cooktops and ovens do.
• If you have ceiling fans in your rooms, turn them on. Fans
make a room feel more comfortable—and using them could
save hundreds of dollars a year by reducing your air
conditioning bill.
• Air-dry laundry instead of using a dryer. If you live in a city or
you can’t hang clothes outside on a clothesline because of
allergens in the air, try hanging them on hangers and letting
them drip-dry in your laundry room or inside your home.
• When you leave a room, turn out the lights. That single act
can save hundreds of dollars per year.
• Use a programmable thermostat. If you don’t have one, make
it a habit to set the thermostat higher in summer and lower in
winter, or when no one will be home.


66 SUSTAINABILITY
Achieving Sustainable Energy.
• Use natural light when possible, and let the sun warm your
home on cold days.
• On hot days, close shades and curtains to reduce the sun’s
heat.
• Maintain furnaces, air conditioners and other energy-intensive
appliances so they run efficiently.
• Replace air filters or clean a reusable filter according to the
manufacturer’s schedule. Dirty air filters cause air-conditioning
or heating systems to run longer and harder as airflow gets
restricted.
After you’ve made and carried out a family plan to reduce
one or more of your household’s utility bills, share with your
counselor how your plan affected your family’s usage.
Lowering Transportation Bills
To evaluate your family’s fuel and transportation expenses, look
at your family’s transportation-related bills (gasoline, diesel,
parking, public
transportation,
etc.). As a
family,
consider how
you can help
reduce these
costs.
Here are
some ways
you can save
on fuel and transportation costs.
• Use the right grade of gasoline. Most cars run fine on regular.
Look at the vehicle owner’s manual to find out what’s right for
your family’s car. Regular-grade gas is usually significantly less
expensive than premium grade.
• Make sure the fuel cap is on tight. Loose gas caps can reduce
fuel efficiency and allow gasoline to vaporize into the air.
• Carpool, use public transit, or bike and walk when you
safely can.
• Encourage family members to not drive aggressively and to
drive at the speed limit. Vehicles lose economy at speeds
above 55 mph.
• If it’s cool outside, use the flow-through ventilation system in
your car instead of rolling down windows or running the air
As a Scout, you
should make
conscious choices
about the stuff
that you own,
have to store, take
care of, use and
responsibly dis-
pose of.


.Achieving Sustainable Energy
SUSTAINABILITY 67
When your family’s vehicle needs replacing, consider an electric or
hybrid vehicle. You not only save over $1,000 a year in lower fuel and
maintenance costs but can also reduce dependence on fossil fuels
(depending on the electricity source). You can charge your electric vehicle
at home or at a charging station (above). Don’t buy a big car unless it is
needed — it takes more energy to move more kilograms.
conditioner. Air conditioning increases fuel use. Rolling down
your windows reduces the aerodynamics and fuel efficiency of
the car.
• On a trip, carry suitcases, tents, coolers, and camping gear inside
the vehicle, not on a roof rack. Loaded roof racks increase wind
resistance and fuel use. Also eliminate unnecessary weight from
your car.
• Idling for a long time in a drive-through lane wastes gas.
Instead, park and walk inside.
After you have followed your family plan to reduce fuel and
transportation costs, discuss with your counselor how your plan
affected your family’s transportation habits.


68 SUSTAINABILITY


.What About All Our Other Stuff?
SUSTAINABILITY 69
What About All
Our Other Stuff?
We all have stuff — essentials, wants, and things we no longer
need. Our consumer culture encourages us to buy more than we
need. Living greener means:
• Distinguishing between needs and wants
• Eliminating unnecessary stuff
By decluttering and making conscious purchasing choices,
we can live more sustainably. Here’s one family project idea to
declutter your home.
• Sort through possessions together.
• Do a clothing evaluation: Consider fit, comfort, and likelihood
of use.
• Recycle/Repurpose: Donate reusable items to thrift stores or
charities.
• Sell: Host a garage sale or use online platforms.
Troops and crews can also come up with decluttering
projects. For instance:
• Fundraiser: Host a rummage sale.
• Service project: Assist a charity with a sale.
Plastic Waste and Microplastics
We use plastic as food wrappers, containers, and to-go cups and
boxes (Polystyrene). Plastic helps make components in our
vehicles, toys, and electronics. It’s used in construction materials
and furniture. Plastics have replaced heavier steel, less durable
paper products, and toxic metals.
Life sure is different — and often better — because of
plastics. However, Americans generate about 485 million pounds
of plastic waste each year, which is nearly 1.5 pounds per
person. Over 80% of this waste ends up in landfills.


70 SUSTAINABILITY
What About All Our Other Stuff?.
Plastic pollution poses significant environmental threats:
• Harm to wildlife: Entanglement from, suffocation by, and
ingestion of plastic harms marine animals.
• Disrupted ecosystems: Plastic debris accumulates in oceans,
damaging habitats and entering the food chain. Microplastics
pose a risk to all levels of the marine ecosystem.
• Pollution from production: Plastic production relies on fossil
fuels, releases greenhouse gases, and can contaminate the
environment.
• Landfill issues: Landfills filled with plastic can leach harmful
chemicals into the environment.
• Human health concerns: Microplastics have been found in
humans, raising concerns about potential health impacts.
Here are some ways to address plastic pollution:
• Reduce single-use plastics: Use reusable bags and bottles,
and avoid plastic straws.
• Wash clothes less often: Synthetic fibers shed microplastics
when they’re washed, so washing clothes less minimizes
microplastics release.
• Avoid microbead products: Cosmetics, facial scrubs and other
products contain microbeads, a major source of microplastic
pollution. Avoiding these products protects waterways.
• Improve waste management: Recycle effectively.
• Support sustainable policies: Advocate for plastic reduction
and biodegradable alternatives.
By taking action to reduce plastic pollution, we can protect
our environment and safeguard the health of our planet for
future generations.
Reports of
microscopic bits
of plastic washing
ashore to become
part of a beach
are starting to
spring up where
stunningly beauti-
ful and abundant
natural environ-
ments once stood.
The Great Pacific Garbage Patch is a collection of
marine debris in the North Pacific Ocean. Also known
as the Pacific trash vortex, the garbage patch is actually
two distinct collections of debris bounded by the
massive North Pacific Subtropical Gyre. According to
scientists, its area could be as much as 600,000 square
miles, or twice the size of Texas.


SUSTAINABILITY 71
.What About All Our Other Stuff?
The Number System for Plastic Recyclables
A coding system exists for identifying the type of plastic used in
products and packing materials. This recycling codes system
consists of a number within the universal recycling symbol,
which is a triangle formed by three arrows.
Each code provides useful information about the
recyclability of an item and its possible effects on human health.
Here are the seven types of plastics represented by the recycling
codes system:
NUMBER RESIN TYPE DESCRIPTION
PET or PETE
(polyethylene
terephthalate)
Used for clear plastic bottles for
water, soda, and some food
containers
HDPE (high-density
polyethylene)
Found in opaque plastic bottles
for milk, detergents, and some
rigid containers
PVC (polyvinyl
chloride)
Used in pipes, building
materials, and some food
packaging (Often avoided due
to health concerns.)
LDPE (low-density
polyethylene)
Found in plastic bags, grocery
bags, and some squeezable
bottles.
PP (polypropylene) Used in straws, yogurt
containers, bottle caps, and
some carpets.
PS (polystyrene) Used in Styrofoam takeout
containers, packing materials,
and some disposable cups
Other Includes all other plastics not
covered in categories 1-6. Might
contain multiple resin types or
less common plastics.


What About All Our Other Stuff?.
72 SUSTAINABILITY
Electronic Waste (E-Waste)
When the newest gadget comes along and replaces the outdated
computer, television, stereo, CD player, smartphone, or any
number of other electronic devices, the old one often gets tossed
in the trash. Americans now own an average of 17 electronic
gadgets per household. It’s a terrible idea to just throw them
away.
All electronic scrap may contain contaminants such as lead,
cadmium, and beryllium. These toxic heavy metals can leak into
our environment in landfills and spew into the atmosphere as ashes
from incinerators. It has become increasingly important to manage
e-waste more carefully and effectively.
Many Cub Scout packs and Scouts BSA troops across the
country have signed up to contribute to this program, collecting
electronic waste from their communities and other “stuff” that is
not commonly recycled, such as used juice boxes and pouches,
candy wrappers, and office products.
Try counting the
electronic gadgets
your family has.
Are you surprised
by the number in
your home?
In 2009, 438 million new consumer electronics were sold, 5
million tons of electronics were gathering dust in storage, 2.37
million tons were ready for recycling, and yet only 25 percent of
these tons were collected for recycling.
Source: U.S. Environmental Protection Agency


.What About All Our Other Stuff?
SUSTAINABILITY 73
In exchange for acting as a collection station and shipping
the waste to the company, the Scouts earn points for their troop
for the waste they collect. Points earned can be redeemed for
charitable gifts, or for a payment of a penny a point to nonprofit
organizations or schools.
Consumer electronics now make up 1 to 2 percent of all solid
waste. A great deal of energy and diverse, often scarce resources go
into manufacturing electronics. Instead of giving these devices the
heave-ho when they have served their purpose, recycle electronic
products even if you must go to some trouble to do so.
Some recycling centers won’t accept electronic waste
but a growing number of businesses now offer e-waste
recycling.
New Life for Old Cellphones
The metals from cellphones—gold, silver, platinum,
palladium, copper, tin, and
zinc—are recovered in the
recycling process, then used
in such different industries
as jewelry, plating,
electronics, automotive, and
art.
The plastics recovered
from cellphones are recycled
into components for new
electronic devices and other
plastic products such as
garden furniture, license
plate frames, nonfood
containers, and replacement
auto parts.
When the rechargeable battery can
no longer be reused, it can be recycled into other
rechargeable battery products.
Many councils
collect old
cellphones for
recycling. Check
with your local
council to see if
it participates.





.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
SUSTAINABILITY 75
Earth’s Life-Support
Systems
One way to picture how planetary systems support life on Earth
and interact with one another is to think of an intensive-care
unit in a hospital, where many life-support systems are in place
to help critically ill people survive and get better. Earth also has
life-support systems. In a sense, our planet could be considered
one big intensive-care unit, supporting all forms of life.
The Encyclopedia of Life Support Systems offers this definition:
“A life support system … furthers the life of the biosphere
in a sustainable fashion. The fundamental attribute of life
support systems is that together they provide all of the
sustainable needs required for continuance of life. These
needs go far beyond biological requirements. Thus life
support systems encompass natural environmental systems
as well as … social systems required to foster societal
harmony, safety, nutrition, medical care, economic
standards, and the development of new technology.
The one common thread in all of these systems is that
they operate in partnership with the conservation of
global natural resources.”
By viewing the world in this way, people can begin to develop a
new appreciation of how we can work together to sustain life on
Earth. As we gain a deeper understanding of nature and society,
that knowledge can be used to create a better quality of life and
a healthy, sustainable environment for those of us who live here
now and for all those who come after us.


76 SUSTAINABILITY
Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
This is a crucial challenge of our time. Many of our
technologies and social institutions will need to be redesigned
to lessen the environmental impact on our natural resources.
To make this happen requires a positive attitude toward
sustainable development. Instead of consuming more of Earth’s
limited resources, people will need to learn how to consume
far less.
Scouts are well prepared to lead this effort. Scouts are used
to leaving no trace behind when camping in the backcountry.
And community service is second nature for Scouts who see
areas of need and pitch in to create a better quality of life for all.
Species Decline
The world’s biodiversity (number of different species of plants
and animals) is declining at a record rate, according to the
International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), an
organization that produces an annual “red list” of the most
vulnerable wildlife. Current extinction rates are at least 100 to
1,000 times higher than natural rates found in the fossil records,
the group reported. Humans are the main reason for the decline
of many of these species.
“Habitat destruction and degradation are the leading
threats, but other significant pressures include over-exploitation
(for food, pets, and medicine), introduced species, pollution,
and disease,” the IUCN has reported.
In 2024, the Red List of Threatened Species noted that of
161,000 species assessed, 45,000 are threatened with extinction,
including 41 percent of amphibians, 34 percent of reef-building
corals, 24 percent of mammals, and 13 percent of birds.
One strategy for preventing species decline is to protect and
preserve wildlife habitats. Governments and private organizations
purchase land to protect wildlife and provide nature preserves,
state parks, national parks and reserves, and designated wilderness
areas. Another strategy is to manage our natural resources to
provide critical wildlife habitats, such as active forest management
Consider promoting sustainability and ecologically
sound practices for your larger community—Earth
itself—as the biggest Scouting project that you and
other like-minded Scouts can undertake in
your lifetime.


SUSTAINABILITY 77
.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
that takes into account the value of wildlife habitat and
conservation as well as timber values.
Well-managed protected areas can benefit many species.
Yet only about 17 percent of Earth’s land surface is currently
protected, which is not enough to preserve the world’s biological
diversity. (The United Nations’ goal is 30%.) Captive breeding—
programs in which endangered species are bred in captivity to
increase their numbers—has had some success in reintroducing
Laws and regulations fostering biological diversity
exist at state, national, and international levels. The U.S.
Endangered Species Act of 1973 was enacted to protect
plant and animal species.


78 SUSTAINABILITY
Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
species to wilderness areas. Ultimately, however, if suitable
habitat is not available and few released animals survive, those
reintroductions may end in failure.
Many organizations work to increase suitable wildlife
habitat and have been successful in helping species recover from
extirpation (the disappearance of species in certain areas) and
near extinction. Scientific research and public education play big
parts in helping people understand the needs of certain species
to help them recover. Many species have been reestablished and
their populations stabilized in areas where they once thrived,
including the American bison, eastern wild turkey, American
bald eagle, whitetail deer, gray wolves, California condors,
whooping cranes, and grizzly bears.
Animals, fish, and birds cross national borders, and marine
mammals traverse vast oceans, so there is a great need for
international agreements to protect biodiversity. Cooperation
among nations is crucial to protect wildlife, marine life,
amphibians, birds, and pollinators such as bees and bats.
Two important international agreements to protect
threatened or endangered mammals were crafted by the
International Whaling Commission, which regulates commercial
hunting of whales; and the Convention on the International
Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, which
regulates the buying and selling of endangered species and their
parts, such as rhino horns, skins, and ivory.
Much more must be done to slow the destruction of wildlife
habitats and protect our environment and ecosystems, which
is one more reason why leading a sustainable lifestyle is how
every Scout can take a big step for humankind.
If you have a yard, one way you can help wildlife is to turn
your lawn into a suitable habitat for birds, butterflies, and bees.
By providing food in the form of plants that attract and sustain
“A sustainable future cannot be achieved without
conserving biological diversity—animal and plant
species, their habitats and their genes—not only for
nature itself, but also for all 7 billion people who
depend on it. The latest IUCN Red List is a clarion [loud,
clear] call to world leaders … to secure the web of life
on this planet.”
—Julia Marton-Lefèvre, director general of the IUCN
Conserving
water now is our
best way to “Be
Prepared” for
the future.


SUSTAINABILITY 79
.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
birds, butterflies, and bees, and by providing water, cover, and
places for wildlife to raise their young, your garden can qualify as
a Certified Wildlife Habitat by the National Wildlife Federation.
You can also work with your Scout troop and local schools to
transform school property into an educational wildlife garden.
Discuss with your counselor how human activities can
endanger animals and plants and contribute to species extinction.
What do you think can be done to stop the decline in wildlife and
its impact on a sustainable environment?
World Population
The diverse life on Earth is interconnected in a “vast web of
life.” Maintaining biodiversity is essential to the welfare and
future of humanity. Biodiversity contributes significantly to the
quality of life on Earth, providing climate regulation, food, clean
water, and clean air.
We rely on these wild resources daily: Many of our medicines
are derived from plants, and we source food, rubber, wood, and
other critical products from wild populations of fish, shellfish,
trees, and other living things. When a species becomes extinct, it
diminishes our lives and those of future generations.
Consider how the world’s growing human population
impacts biodiversity. Before meeting with your counselor, you
might want to research how the needs and demands of people
affect the sustainability of life on Earth.
Disasters
A disaster is an occurrence of a natural catastrophe,
technological accident, or human-caused event that has resulted
in severe property damage, deaths, and/or multiple injuries.
The types of natural disasters include:
• Avalanche
• Coastal Flooding
• Cold Wave
• Drought
• Earthquake
• Hail
• Heat Wave
• Hurricane
• Ice Storm
• Landslide
• Lightning
• Riverine Flooding
• Strong Wind
• Tornado
• Tsunami
• Volcanic Activity
• Wildfire
• Winter Weather
As Earth’s climate warms, sea levels rise and snow
and ice melt sooner in the spring, causing animals,
and ecosystems to come under greater environmental
stress.


80 SUSTAINABILITY
Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
Human-made hazards, including dam and levee failure,
radioactive contamination, chemical contamination, terrorism,
infrastructure failure, explosions, and transportation accidents
can rise to the magnitude of a disaster.
Disasters can disrupt society in three general ways:
• Loss of life: This is a common way to rank disasters, focusing
on the number of people killed. By this measure, disasters like
the 1900 Galveston hurricane (6,000 to 12,000 dead) or the
1911 Triangle Shirtwaist Factory fire in New York City (146
dead) had very high costs.
• Economic cost: Disasters can cause immense financial
damage to infrastructure, property, and livelihoods. Hurricane
Katrina in 2005 ($125 billion) and the Deepwater Horizon oil
spill in 2010 ($100 billion) are examples of disasters with huge
economic costs.
• Social impact: Disasters can disrupt communities and cause
long-term social problems. The September 11th attacks in 2001
and Hurricane Sandy in 2012 are examples of events that had
a profound social impact.
In 2024, the United States experienced 27 separate weather
or climate disasters that each resulted in at least $1 billion in
damages.
Source: NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information (NCEI U.S. Billion-
Dollar Weather and Climate Disasters (2025). ncei.noaa.gov/access/billions


SUSTAINABILITY 81
.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
Climate Change
On any given day, you might see the weather change from
sunny and warm to cold with thunderstorms. As you go through
each year, you see the seasons change from spring to summer to
fall to winter.
Earth’s climate may be changing, too, but in ways that are
more significant and far-reaching than daily or seasonal shifts
in the weather. While Earth’s climate has gone through many
periods of change in its long history, the actions of people may
now be adding significantly to the changes.
When people around the world started burning large
quantities of coal, oil, and natural gas to power their homes,
vehicles, factories, and businesses more than 100 years ago,
the burning of these fossil fuels began releasing large amounts
of carbon dioxide. Most scientists agree that fossil fuels are a
significant factor in our changing climate.
Greenhouse gases exist naturally in the atmosphere. As the
world’s population has grown, however, the added gases from
human activities seem to be causing Earth to grow warmer at a
faster rate, and have set off many other changes on land, in the
atmosphere, and in the oceans. These changes affect animals,
plants, and people in many ways.
Annual average temperature
Source: Berkeley Earth, berkeleyearth.org


Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
82 SUSTAINABILITY
Scientists predict that higher temperatures can lead to more
droughts, wilder and more extreme weather due to changing
rain and snow patterns, less snowpack, and rapidly melting
glaciers, shrinking sea ice, and thawing permafrost.
Less rain can mean water sources dry up in some locations,
while too much rain can cause devastation from terrible flooding
in other places. More hot days can make crop harvests smaller
and sicken animals and people.
Oceans play an important role in keeping Earth’s carbon
cycle in balance. Warmer water and increased ocean acidity
from absorbing excess carbon dioxide can make it hard for
corals to build skeletons, and for shellfish to build the shells
needed for protection. As the acidity in the ocean rises, more
and more marine species may be unable to reproduce and
may die out.
Severe heat waves and stronger hurricanes are other possible
effects from climate change. These changes may make it too hot to
grow certain crops, and could reduce the amount of water available
for irrigation.
Rising temperatures and an increase in the intensity and
number of droughts worldwide will likely cause freshwater
supplies to diminish. People will have to make lifestyle changes,
using less water in their homes and businesses.
Heat waves, severe storms, air pollution, and diseases linked
to climate may leave many people at risk for illness, especially
infants, the elderly and disabled, and those who live in big cities
and along coastlines. Heat waves can be lethal for people who are
already ill.
Plants and animals rely on the specific climate conditions
of their habitat to survive and reproduce. Because all life
is interconnected, even subtle changes in temperature or
precipitation can have cascading effects: If a key plant struggles,
the insects that feed on it suffer, which impacts the animals that
prey on those insects. All that ultimately destabilizes the entire
food web and ecosystem.
According
to the U.S.
Environmental
Protection
Agency, more
deaths are caused
by heat waves
each year than
by hurricanes,
tornadoes, floods,
and earthquakes
combined.
In every ecosystem, all plants and animals play roles in
the web of life. For example, some plants and animals
are sources of food; others are predators, pollinators,
or sources of shelter. Losing one element of an
ecosystem can harm many others.


.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
SUSTAINABILITY 83
Some species are already moving to cooler locations. On a
warming Earth, plants and animals that live in cold places, such
as the Arctic, may not have suitable places to live any longer.
Some scientists predict that up to one-fourth of all plants and
animals on Earth could become extinct within the next 100 years.
Reducing the use of fossil fuels and reducing garbage waste
gives the coral reefs a better chance of surviving the effects of
climate change.
Forests are particularly sensitive to climate change, because
they can’t get up and move when it gets too warm. Forests
provide homes, shelter, and food for many kinds of plants and
animals. Trees protect water quality in rivers, lakes, and streams.
They also filter many pollutants out of the air we breathe. They
can lower heating and cooling costs when near homes.
Severe droughts and the extreme fire conditions that result
when long-term drought conditions take hold are expected to
occur more often. On a warming Earth, wildfires may occur more
often, spread faster, and burn more forestland than they do now.
To do some climate-change research of your own, find a
map that shows the pattern of global temperature change for
a period of at least 100 years. Discuss with your counselor the
major factors that scientists believe affect the world’s climate
and temperature. Share your ideas about how climate change
impacts sustainability of food, water, or other resources.
Ozone found high in the atmosphere is called “good
ozone” because it protects life from the sun’s harmful
ultraviolet rays. But ozone close to Earth’s surface is
considered “bad ozone” because it is a main ingredient
of smog. The pollutants in smog make it hard for
people to breathe. As the temperature rises, more
ozone is created.


Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
84 SUSTAINABILITY
A Tipping Point
The makeup of our atmosphere, marine ecosystems, coastal
zones, freshwater systems, forests, land and soil, and biological
diversity are all coming under increasing
pressure as the global population grows
and the global economy expands.
Since 1950 the world’s population
has tripled to more than 8 billion people.
In that same time, the global economy
has increased more than 15-fold. We have
reduced poverty, improved health, and
bettered most people’s standard of living.
However, all this human activity has had
far-reaching impacts on the planet and
how it functions. Many scientists believe
we may be reaching critical “tipping
points” in which the effects on land,
oceans, air, and fresh water might be
irreversible.
Carbon dioxide levels in the
atmosphere are increasing at a rate 100
times faster than any natural increase
since the last ice age. As more and more
rainforests are cleared for housing,
farming, and fuel, the environment has
less ability to absorb greenhouse gases.
More cars on the roads mean more pollution in the air and in
the world’s oceans and fresh water.
Earth’s life-support systems interact in complex ways. For
example, coral reefs in the world’s oceans have been degraded
by fishing and tourism, and by chemical and agricultural
pollution. Now the reefs are also under threat from the changing
chemistry of seawater, which is one result of the dramatic
increase in atmospheric carbon dioxide.
Take advantage of public transportation
in your area. Riding on a subway, train, or
bus gives you downtime to read or listen
to music.


.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
SUSTAINABILITY 85
Increasingly warm and dry conditions are contributing to
soil erosion, dwindling wildlife diversity, diminishing freshwater
supplies, and large intense wildfires worldwide.
Some scientists call this period of time the Anthropocene
Era, where human beings are the dominating environmental
force. Deforestation, biodiversity loss, freshwater depletion, and
climate change are issues that call for major lifestyle changes
and action on a large scale.
The need is great for cooperation among businesses, cities,
states, regions, and countries because these life-support systems
sustain all forms of life on the planet.
Use of Raw Materials
The extraction of raw materials from Earth has social and
economic effects, both positive and negative. Extracting raw
materials can create jobs and economic growth, but extraction
activities also have the potential to affect people’s health and
disrupt or displace communities. Taking raw materials from
Earth may cause environmental damage, such as water scarcity,
air and water pollution, and problems of waste disposal.
Our society increasingly needs metals like copper, gold,
iron, aluminum, lithium, nickel, and dozens more, all of which
must be mined. Recycling can reduce the need for mining, but it
Proper forest
management
based on scien-
tific principles
can help forests
be healthier
and resist their
vulnerability to
drought, disease,
and insect attack,
while providing
renewable wood
for products we
all need.


Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
86 SUSTAINABILITY
The energy
and resources
required to
make one new
aluminum soda
can could be used
to make 20 cans
from recycled
aluminum.
Source: Can
Manufacturers
Institute
doesn’t eliminate it. Mining is environmentally disruptive. Laws
can protect against the worst environmental impacts, but many
countries lack these laws or don’t enforce them. Ethically, we
also need to prioritize safe labor practices and pay workers a
living wage.
Increasingly, ethics play a huge part in sustainable
extraction of raw materials. Sustainable development of
natural materials means preserving the environment, which
can involve, for example, harvesting at the appropriate times,
replanting for the future, and restoring the land to health. More
companies are embracing forest certification standards like the
Sustainable Forestry Initiative to ensure forest sustainability.
A company in Australia works with local communities and
a local partner in Madagascar, which is the source for 80 percent
of the world’s vanilla. To ensure a sustainable, fair-trade supply
of vanilla from the island, they have adopted environmentally
sound harvest and production methods. The company works
to educate the local people in how sustainable agricultural
methods can enhance their quality of life and help protect their
future.
These are just a few of the ways that businesses are turning
toward sustainable methods to reduce their environmental impact
on the planet while at the same time earning profits. Now you can
meet with your counselor and talk about how the harvesting and
production of raw materials, along with how they are distributed,
consumed, and disposed of or recycled, is part of current and future
thinking and planning for sustainability.
Fairtrade-certified cotton guarantees fair
wages and safe working conditions for
farmers.
USDA Certified Organic ensures that
crops are grown without synthetic
fertilizers or pesticides. This protects
the environment and promotes worker
safety.


.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
SUSTAINABILITY 87
Melting Glaciers
The melting of glaciers and ice sheets could lead to a rise in sea levels.
Imagine how that could change Earth’s shorelines and disrupt societies
around the world. Already, communities are being displaced from low-
lying oceanfronts and islands. To understand what melting glaciers look
like, study the two sets of photos below from Glacier National Park in
Montana.
2008
Circa 1930
Sperry Glacier


Earth’s Life-Support Systems.
88 SUSTAINABILITY
Ecological Overshoot
You might have heard the term “ecological overshoot” but did
not know what it meant. Individuals in the United States
consume more water, more food, more goods—just about more
of everything—than most people in other parts of the world.
That rate of consumption has increased so much that we now
are using more resources faster than those resources can be
replenished by nature. This is called ecological overshoot.
Think about what would happen if you kept withdrawing
money from your bank account but never replenished it.
Eventually, the money would run out. The same thing is
happening with our water supplies. We are “withdrawing” water
faster than it can be replenished. In fact, in some aquifers, the
water cannot be replenished and will eventually be depleted. The
same thing can happen with other resources, such as minerals,
food, fuel, and so on.
City governments, too, are looking for ways to help
their cities become more sustainable. Some cities
are working to significantly reduce greenhouse gas
emissions. These steps include banning plastic bags;
using wind power and other clean, renewable energy
sources such as hydropower, biomass, and solar power
for some of their electricity; switching high-wattage
electric lights in parking garages and streetlights to
low-wattage LED lamps; and recycling restaurant food
waste by composting.


.Earth’s Life-Support Systems
SUSTAINABILITY 89
When we run out of something, we hardly give it a second
thought to where we can easily get more. When something gets
old, we throw it out and replace it. We continue to create vast
amounts of waste and use up our resources with the notion that
those resources are unlimited. Now that we are more aware of
ecological overshoot, which scientists have known about for
decades, we can do something to change the way we think and
behave.
The graphic here shows how in our current state, we are
consuming or “spending” Earth’s natural resources about 1.6
times faster than they can be replenished. This means it takes
us 17 months to replenish what we consume in 19 months. If
we were to work together to substantially reduce the rate of
consumption, we could close that gap and Earth could sustain its
current population.
How many Earths does it take to support humanity?
Source: Global Footprint NetworkEcological Overshoot





SUSTAINABILITY 91
.Toward a Sustainable Future
Toward a
Sustainable Future
Achieving sustainability requires balancing environmental,
social, and economic needs. We must strive for “Enough. For
All. Forever.” This will require navigating trade-offs between
short-term and long-term benefits.
You might ask yourself what role you play in sustainability
and what you can do to help sustain Earth. Earning the
Sustainability merit badge is the first big step in educating
yourself and increasing your awareness about the topic.
Continue the trend by making your family, friends, and
classmates more aware.
Here are some actions we can take.
Individual Actions
• Reduce your environmental impact:
— Choose green power.
— Conserve energy at home and school.
— Use water wisely.
— Reduce, reuse, and recycle.
— Buy local and sustainable products.
• Spread awareness: Educate your family and community about
sustainability.
• Take action: Join environmental groups and volunteer your
time.
Family Sustainability
• Have a family meeting: Discuss sustainable living practices
and how to incorporate them into your daily lives.
• Live by the Scout Oath and Law: These values guide
sustainable living.


92 SUSTAINABILITY
Toward a Sustainable Future.
Minimizing Your Global Footprint
• Reduce consumption: Buy only what you need and
minimize waste.
• Embrace the three R’s: Recycle, reuse, and reduce.
• Pledge to be a sustainability citizen: Make conscious choices
in all aspects of your life.
Supporting Sustainability on a Larger Scale
• Transition to renewable energy: Invest in solar, wind, and
other clean energy sources.
• Embrace a circular economy: Reduce waste and maximize
resource efficiency.
• Create sustainable cities: Promote green building, walkable
communities, and efficient transportation.
• Foster global cooperation: Collaborate on climate policies and
regulations.
• Advance green technologies: Develop and implement
sustainable manufacturing practices and innovative
technologies.
• Focus on social equity: Ensure a just and equitable transition
to a sustainable future.
Challenges and Opportunities
• Meeting energy demands: Transitioning to renewable energy
requires significant investment and innovation.
• Balancing economic growth with sustainability: Finding ways
to promote both is crucial.
• Addressing social equity: Ensuring everyone benefits from the
transition to a sustainable future.
The future of sustainability is uncertain but full of potential.
By working together and embracing sustainable practices, we
can create a thriving future for all. Scouts can play a vital role in
leading the way toward a more sustainable future. Who knows?
You might take it a step further and pursue a career in the
growing field of sustainability.


SUSTAINABILITY 93
.Toward a Sustainable Future
The Scout Law and Sustainability
A Scout is:
Trustworthy. Sustainability starts with you, and helps you to stand out as
a young leader. You can help by recycling, and advocating green solutions
to everyday issues.
Loyal. Demonstrate sustainability by being the voice of reason and reminding
others we all share limited resources.
Helpful. You can make a difference in your family and in your community—
and help our world—by using only what you need. Take time to share with
others what you are doing.
Friendly. Volunteer in your community at a community garden, recycling
center, or other sustainable activity and encourage others to do the same.
This can be a fun and exciting way to see firsthand how, when we all are
working together, we can make a difference in this world.
Courteous. Always thank people for their help and understanding, because we
all benefit from sustainability and thinking about how our actions, no matter
how small, affect others.
Kind. Treat this world with respect, save valuable resources and set an
example for others to follow. Take time to smile; it does make a difference.
Obedient. To protect the world’s resources you need to be true to yourself
and believe in sustainability.
Cheerful. Tell your stories of sustainability activities and projects with a
smile, knowing you are making a difference, and others just might take
action based on how you tell your story.
Thrifty. Track your savings at home or in your troop on solid
sustainability actions.
Brave. You can be a leader at home or in your community when taking
the appropriate actions. Stand up for what is right; start with your actions
so you and your family can lead others to engage in sustainable living.
Clean. Respect our world and the valuable resources we are consuming
every day. You can always help by understanding what is really needed
and talking with others to protect the air we breathe, and the water
we drink.
Reverent. Always consider other points of view and be true to Earth,
as we all live here together.
Remember that sustainability starts with you.





.Careers in Sustainability
SUSTAINABILITY 95
Careers in Sustainability
Scouts can use their science skills in many ways to help create
a sustainable future, from developing sources of renewable
energy to securing habitats for endangered wildlife or creating
nonpolluting plastics.
Scientists in all fields working together and with the
community will be needed to help solve the increasingly
complex problems our world is facing. Here are some career
paths in sustainability that may be of interest to you.
Environmental consultants study the ecological impacts of
conservation, development, and industry projects and recommend
solutions to environmental problems. Natural resource managers
care for ecological resources for private and public organizations.
Park naturalists provide education programs to people of all ages.
Improving our food supply requires agronomists, animal scientists,
veterinarians, food scientists, geneticists, soil conservationists,
agricultural chemists, and precision agriculture specialists.
Restoration ecologists carry out programs to reestablish
natural ecosystems. In the field of geography, geographic
information system specialists evaluate alternative locations
for landfills, roads, and other facilities using computer-based
map information.
Area specialists study specific countries or regions of the
world and provide information to help government officials
set policy or address important issues. Coastal zone managers
oversee ecologically sensitive areas, such as river mouths, bays,
and marshes, so the areas can better survive the growth of
cities, ports, industries, and roads as well as an increase
in tourism.
Scientists can develop new instruments and techniques
to monitor sustainable practices. Large teams are needed to
establish and maintain complex networks that can monitor the
environment and individual and societal activities, then analyze
the data to observe trends and predict effects of future changes.
In public health careers, statisticians help interpret data
Mathematicians analyze the data to develop models to, for
example, predict epidemics and compare various strategies
to combat those epidemics. Mathematicians and statisticians
also create models that can help find oil reserves, understand
complex biosystems, forecast weather, and predict storm surges.
Many large
companies employ
sustainability
officers to ensure
their business
is functioning
with sustainability
in mind.


96 SUSTAINABILITY
Careers in Sustainability.
Chemists and chemical engineers design products and
processes that can eliminate or reduce hazardous substances.
Careers in green chemistry and engineering can lead to
new household products, green building materials, and
energy-efficient devices.
Biologists also work to solve environmental problems and
preserve natural habitats. Zoo biologists undertake endangered
species recovery programs. Wildlife biologists manage, protect,
rehabilitate, and enhance wildlife habitat.
Political scientists, lawyers, lawmakers, and policy analysts
will set policies that can drive us toward a sustainable future.
They might advocate for energy efficient appliances, emissions
control, green chemicals, recycling policies, and economic
incentives to move individuals, communities, and nations
toward these goals.
Foresters manage forest resources to sustainably provide
products that people need as well as habitats for wildlife,
watersheds for clean water, recreational opportunities, and jobs
that support communities.
Sociologists can use their understanding of human
interaction to help create sustainable pathways for the
future. Careers for sociologists include environmental
policy, environmental outreach, environmental law,
urban planning, communications, environmental affairs,
resource management, conflict mediation, government
or university sustainability coordination, sustainable
development, and human dimensions science.
The complex issues surrounding global climate change
will provide jobs for chemists and engineers in the
government and private sectors as challenges to
sustainability arise and solutions must be developed.
Park rangers
protect state and
national parks and
educate the public
in preservation of
natural resources.
Psychologists, who are trained to study human
behavior, may research such topics as understanding
environmental beliefs, attitudes, and values and
determining the emotional benefits humans receive
from green, open spaces. Psychologists may also study
the local ecological concepts of a native society.


SUSTAINABILITY 97
.Careers in Sustainability
Geologists, geophysicists, hydrologists, oceanographers,
marine scientists, meteorologists, environmental scientists, and
soil scientists gather and interpret data about Earth and other
planets, using their knowledge to increase our understanding
of natural processes. Atmospheric scientists study weather,
solar radiation, climate and its effects, ozone depletion, climate
change, and pollution.
Economic geologists study metallic and nonmetallic resources
and mineral deposits, and find safe ways to dispose of waste
materials from mining. Environmental geologists study the ways in
which land, water, air, and humans interact. They also work to find
solutions to pollution, waste management, flooding, and erosion.
Civil engineers help to meet human needs for industrial
products, natural resources, food, transportation, shelter, waste
management, and energy while protecting environmental quality
and the natural resources essential for future development.
Mechanical engineers design and manufacture more
efficient vehicles and power systems that use renewable energy
sources, along with many other products needed for creating
a sustainable world.
Electrical and computer engineers design information systems
to connect people, create networks that allow communities to
quickly report data such as disease outbreaks or receive warning of
natural disasters, and give people in developing countries access to
the internet. They also design computer chips and components to
be more environmentally friendly.
See the resources
section to find
more about
sustainability and
careers in
the field.
Landscape architects plan and design outdoor spaces
for homeowners, businesses, and others. They
understand how to make the best use of large land
areas, protect or restore natural resources, and also
help preserve historic areas. Landscape architects are
leaders in the area of sustainable, “green” designs.
Congratulations! In fulfilling the requirements for the Sustainability
merit badge, you have become a better citizen of planet Earth. As you go
forward in your life and in Scouting, remember all the things you have
learned about living a sustainable lifestyle. Go forth and be green!


98 SUSTAINABILITY
Glossary.
Glossary
blackwater. The water that’s flushed down toilets.
biological diversity. The full range of variety and variability
within and among living organisms and the ecological
complexity in which they occur, encompassing ecosystem,
species, and genetic diversity.
biomass. The total mass of living matter within a given unit of
environmental area. Also refer to all plant material,
vegetation, or agricultural waste used as a fuel or energy source.
biosphere. The entire Earth including the atmosphere and all
the living organisms that inhabit it.
carbon footprint. The sum of all emissions of greenhouse
gases (including carbon dioxide) generated by a person, event,
organization, or product. Carbon footprint calculators can
estimate the amount of greenhouse gases you produce.
carbon offset. A reduction in greenhouse gas emissions
(GHG) or an increase in carbon storage (like planting trees) to
compensate for emissions that occur elsewhere.
circular economy. An economic system aimed at eliminating
waste and pollution by keeping products and materials in use
for as long as possible, then composting them or turning them
into new products.
climate change. A change of climate that is attributed directly
or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of
the global atmosphere and which is in addition to natural
climate variability observed over comparable time periods.
composting. The natural process of recycling organic matter,
such as leaves and food scraps, into a valuable fertilizer that
can enrich soil and plants.
consumption. The use of a resource.
eco-city. A human settlement that uses the least possible
resources, keeps waste and pollution to a minimum, and builds
dwellings to make good use of sun, wind, and rain. Food and
goods are sourced locally. Transportation is limited to walking
and cycling, with public transport for longer journeys.


SUSTAINABILITY 99
.Glossary
eco-village. A small-scale intentional community with the
goal of being more socially, economically, and ecologically
sustainable while having less of an ecological impact.
electric vehicle (EV). Vehicle powered by an electric motor that
draws electricity from a battery and is capable of being charged
from an external source. Sometimes called a battery-powered EV
or BEV.
extinction. When all members of a species cease to exist.
fossil fuels. Coal, gasoline, or natural gas formed in the
geological past from the remains of living organisms. They
can be burned to power cars, drive turbines, and generate
electricity. This non-renewable resource is a major source of
carbon dioxide, a greenhouse gas.
geothermal energy. Heat energy from the Earth that can be
used to generate electricity, heat and cool buildings, and bathe.
global economy. The world’s nations, their respective
economies, and the institutions that unite them in a global
marketplace. Developments since World War II and especially
since the early 1990s have enabled rapid movement of
goods and services around the world, causing greater
interdependence in trade and creating a system where the
economic status of one nation affects many.
graywater. The relatively clean wastewater from bathtubs,
sinks, washing machines, and dishwashers.
green chemistry. The design of chemical products and
processes that reduce or eliminate the use or generation of
hazardous substances. Green chemistry applies across the life
cycle of a chemical product, including its design, manufacture,
use, and ultimate disposal.
greenhouse gas. A gas that contributes to the greenhouse
effect by absorbing infrared radiation such as carbon dioxide,
methane, and chlorofluorocarbons.
habitat destruction. The process through which a natural
habitat is rendered unable to support the species present.
hybrid electric vehicle (HEV). A car or other vehicle powered
by an internal combustion engine plus one or more electric
motors that use energy stored in batteries.
industrial pollution. Pollution resulting from an industrial plant
releasing harmful emissions into the environment.
natural resources. Materials or substances such as minerals,
forests, water, and fertile land that occur in nature and can be
used for economic gain.


100 SUSTAINABILITY
Glossary.
nonpoint source pollution. Pollution from water runoff that
carries pollutants from agricultural, residential, and other areas.
nuclear energy. Energy released when the nucleus of uranium
is split under controlled conditions in a reactor. The large
amount of energy released boils water, and the steam drives a
turbine to generate electricity.
oil reserves. An estimate of the amount of crude oil located in a
particular economic region. Oil reserves must have the potential
of being extracted under current technological constraints. For
example, if oil pools are located at unattainable depths, they
would not be considered part of a nation’s reserves.
organic farming. A form of agriculture that relies on techniques
such as crop rotation, green manure, compost, and biological
pest control. Organic farming uses fertilizers and pesticides but
excludes or strictly limits the use of manufactured (synthetic)
fertilizers, pesticides (which include herbicides, insecticides, and
fungicides), plant growth regulators such as hormones, livestock
antibiotics, food additives, and genetically modified organisms.
point source pollution. Any single identifiable source of
pollution from which pollutants are discharged, such as a pipe,
ditch, ship, or smokestack.
pollution. The presence in or introduction into the
environment of a contaminating substance that has harmful or
poisonous effects, thereby causing imbalance.
renewable energy. Energy that comes from resources that
are naturally replenished such as sunlight, wind, rain, tides,
waves, and geothermal heat. Renewable energy is becoming
increasingly important as we look to reduce our reliance on
fossil fuels.
resource depletion. The use of resources, especially a natural
resource, faster than it is replenished.
runoff. The draining away of water (or substances carried in it)
from the surface of an area of land or a structure.
species decline. Reduction in the actual numbers of a species.
Usually this decline is a result of a reduction in the area
occupied by the species.
solar power. The conversion of energy from sunlight
into electricity, either directly using photovoltaics (PV) or
indirectly using concentrated solar power. Solar panels use
the photovoltaic effect to convert light into an electric current.


SUSTAINABILITY 101
.Glossary
Concentrated solar power systems use lenses or mirrors and
solar tracking systems to focus a large area of sunlight to a hot
spot, often to drive a steam turbine.
supply chain. The sequence of processes involved in the
production and distribution of food and other commodities.
sustainable agriculture. A form of agriculture that uses
nonrenewable agricultural resources and on-farm resources in
the most efficient manner to sustain the economic viability of
farm operations.
sustainable development. Development that meets the
needs of the present without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs. The concept of
sustainable development is based on three pillars: economic
development, social development, and environmental
protection.
trash vortex. The Pacific trash vortex is composed of high
concentrations of plastics, chemical sludge, and other debris
trapped by the currents of the North Pacific Gyre. It is located
in North Pacific Ocean roughly between 135°W to 155°W and
35°N and 42°N.
urban planning. The branch of architecture dealing with the
design and organization of urban space and activities.
wastewater. Water mixed with waste matter.
wildlife habitat. An ecological or environmental area that is
inhabited by one or more species of wildlife.
wind power. The use of wind energy to generate electricity
with turbines.
xeriscape. A style of landscape design used in arid regions
that requires little or no irrigation or other maintenance.


102 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability Resources.
Sustainability Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook; Fieldbook;
Animal Science, Architecture, Chemistry,
Citizenship in the Community, Citizenship in
the Nation, Citizenship in the World, Energy,
Environmental Science, Fish and Wildlife
Management, Forestry, Gardening, Landscape
Architecture, Mining in Society, Nature,
Oceanography, Plant Science, Public Health,
Soil and Water Conservation, and Weather
merit badge pamphlets
Scouting Awards
Distinguished Conservation Service Award
Program, Conservation Good Turn, and the
World Conservation Award
Books
Benyus, Janine. Biomimicry: Innovation
Inspired by Nature. Harper Perennial,
2002.
Caradonna, Jeremy L. Sustainability: A
History, Revised and Updated Edition.
Oxford University Press; updated edition,
2022.
The Carbon Almanac Network. The Carbon
Almanac: It’s Not Too Late. Portfolio,
2022.
Carson, Rachel. Silent Spring. Houghton
Mifflin, 1962.
Gates, Bill. How to Avoid a Climate Disaster:
The Solutions We Have and the
Breakthroughs We Need. Vintage, 2022.
Goodall, Jane. The Book of Hope: A Survival
Guide for Trying Times. Celadon Books,
2021.
Gore, Al. An Inconvenient Truth: The Crisis of
Global Warming. Viking Books for Young
Readers, 2007.
Judge, John. The Outdoor Citizen: Get Out,
Give Back, Get Active. Apollo Publishers,
2022.
Kaye, Cathryn Berger, and Philippe Cousteau.
Going Blue: A Teen Guide to Saving Our
Oceans, Lakes, Rivers, and Wetlands. Free
Spirit Publishing, 2010.
Leopold, Aldo. A Sand County Almanac With
Other Essays on Conservation From Round
River. Oxford University Press, 2001.
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting
America’s official retail site,
scoutshop.org, for a complete list
of merit badge pamphlets and
other helpful Scouting materials
and supplies.


SUSTAINABILITY 103
.Sustainability Resources
Lovelock, James E. Gaia: A New Look at Life
on Earth. Oxford Landmark Science, 2016.
McDonough, William, and Michael Braungart.
Cradle to Cradle: Remaking the Way We
Make Things. North Point Press, 2022.
Thunberg, Greta. The Climate Book. Penguin
Press, 2023.
Wirtenberg, Jeana (editor), David Lipsky
(editor), Linda M. Kelley (editor), William
G. Russell (editor). The Sustainable
Enterprise Fieldbook: Building New
Bridges, Second Edition. Routledge, 2018.
Organizations and Websites
American Chemical Society
Green Chemistry Institute
acs.org/greenchemistry.html
American Forest & Paper Association
afandpa.org
American Institute of
Biological Sciences
aibs.org
Association of Fish and
Wildlife Agencies
202-624-7890
fishwildlife.org/projectwild
Call2Recycle
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
call2recycle.org
Center for Biological Diversity
biologicaldiversity.org
Eartheasy
learn.eartheasy.com/guides/composting/
Earth911
earth911.com
Energy Flowcharts
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
flowcharts.llnl.gov
Environmental Protection Agency
202-272-0167
epa.gov/sustainability
epa.gov/smm-electronics
Leave No Trace Center for
Outdoor Ethics
Toll-free telephone: 800-332-4100
www.lnt.org
NASA Climate Kids
climatekids.nasa.gov
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Economic Research Service
ers.usda.gov
Natural Resources Conservation Service
nrcs.usda.gov
Project Learning Tree
Going Green
plt.org/educator-tips/8-sustainability-
activities-and-ideas-for-the-classroom
Project Wet
projectwet.org
Scouts for SDGs
sdgs.scout.org
Sustainable Earth
sustainable-earth.org/activities


104 SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability Resources.
Sustainable Forestry Initiative
forests.org
Sustainability Terms and Definitions
forests.org
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
epa.gov/P3
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
Carbon Footprint Calculator
www3.epa.gov/carbon-footprint-calculator
Transitioning to Green’s Personal
Sustainability Guide
thesustainableenterprisefieldbook.com/
personal-sustainability-guide.html
UNESCO World Conference on Education
for Sustainable Development
Bonn Declaration, 2009
unesdoc.unesco.org/ark:/48223/
pf0000188799
United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Affairs
Sustainable Development Goals
sdgs.un.org/goals
Why Population Growth Matters for
Sustainable Development
un.org/development/desa/pd/sites/www.
un.org.development.desa.pd/files/undesa_
pd_2022_policy_brief_population_growth.pdf
Acknowledgments
Scouting America greatly appreciates the
tireless efforts of volunteers of Scouting
America for their work in creating this merit
badge. Without their vision, insight, expertise,
and time, this merit badge and pamphlet would
not have been possible. Scouting America
thanks Mitchell D. Erickson of Patriots’ Path
Council in New Jersey for his work in revising
this 2025 edition of the Sustainability merit
badge requirements. We also thank Harry L.
Allen III, Scott Anderson, Jeff Birkby, Timothy
P. Farrell, Andrew V. T. Hauser, Michael
Huneke, Jeffrey D. Huppert, Douglas E.
Johnson, Linda Morris Kelley, Andrew
McKeon, David E. Setzer, Thomas Temple,
Jeana Wirtenberg, Ph.D., and Les Wu for their
comments and advice.


SUSTAINABILITY 105
.Sustainability Resources
Photo and Illustration Credits
Morton J. Elrod/University of Montana,
Mansfield Library Archives and Special
Collections, courtesy—page 87 (1930)
Getty Images—pages 34, 36, 66, 67, 68
Lisa McKeon, USGS, courtesy—page 87
(2008)
Ethan Miller/Getty Images—page 31
Mithun Inc., courtesy; mithun.com—page 17
Joe Raedle/Getty Images—page 35
Sustainable Forestry Initiative,
courtesy—page 54 (logo)
U.S. Department of Agriculture,
courtesy—page 86 (USDA logo)
Fairtrade America, courtesy—page 86
(Fairtrade logo)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of or are
protected by Scouting America.
Camp Emerald Bay, courtesy—pages 48
(logo) and 49–53 (all)
W. Garth Dowling—page 30
Brian Payne—page 40
Michael Roytek—pages 6, 15, 18, 21
The Summit Bechtel Family National Scout
Reserve, courtesy—page 12


106 SUSTAINABILITY
Notes.


SUSTAINABILITY 107
.Notes


Alex: How can you tell
when a Scout has earned
the Cooking merit badge?
Andie: How?
Alex: They make good
use of their thyme.
— from a valued Scout Life reader
Make good use of your time by
reading Scout Life magazine.
It’s loaded with outdoor adventure,
games and comics, leadership
tips, life skills, stories about
other Scouts and more. It’s just
what you need to get ahead.
Use promo code SLMBP15 for
a special offer just for Scouts
when you subscribe at
go.scoutlife.org/subscribe


MERIT BADGE LIBRARY
Though intended as an aid to youth in Scouts BSA and qualified Venturers and
Sea Scouts in meeting merit badge requirements, Scouting America's merit badge
pamphlets are of general interest and are made available by many schools and public
libraries.
Always check scouting.org for the latest merit badge requirements. If a Scout has
already started working on a merit badge when new requirements for that merit badge
are introduced, they may continue to use the same pamphlet to earn the badge and
fulfill the requirements therein. In other words, the Scout need not start over again with
the revised requirements.
SCOUTING AMERICA
To place an order,
call 800-323-0736 or go to
scoutshop.org
American Business
American Cultures
American Heritage
American Indian Culture
American Labor
Animal Science
Animation
Archaeology
Archery
Architecture
Art
Astronomy
Athletics
Automotive Maintenance
Aviation
Backpacking
Basketry
Bird Study
Bugling
Camping
Canoeing
Chemistry
Chess
Citizenship in the Community
Citizenship in the Nation
Citizenship in Society
Citizenship in the World
Climbing
Coin Collecting
Collections
Communication
Composite Materials
Cooking
Crime Prevention
Cycling
Dentistry
Digital Technology
Disabilities Awareness
Dog Care
Drafting
Electricity
Electronics
Emergency Preparedness
Energy
Engineering
Entrepreneurship
Environmental Science
Exploration
Family Life
Farm Mechanics
Fingerprinting
Fire Safety
First Aid
Fish & Wildlife Management
Fishing
Fly-Fishing
Forestry
Game Design
Gardening
Genealogy
Geocaching
Geology
Golf
Graphic Arts
Health Care Professions
Hiking
Home Repairs
Horsemanship
Insect Study
Inventing
Journalism
Kayaking
Landscape Architecture
Law
Leatherwork
Lifesaving
Mammal Study
Metalwork
Mining in Society
Model Design and Building
Motorboating
Moviemaking
Multisport
Music
Nature
Nuclear Science
Oceanography
Orienteering
Painting
Personal Fitness
Personal Management
Pets
Photography
Pioneering
Plant Science
Plumbing
Pottery
Programming
Public Health
Public Speaking
Pulp & Paper
Radio
Railroading
Reading
Reptile & Amphibian Study
Rifle Shooting
Robotics
Rowing
Safety
Salesmanship
Scholarship
Scouting Heritage
Scuba Diving
Sculpture
Search & Rescue
Shotgun Shooting
Signs, Signals, Codes
Skating
Small-Boat Sailing
Snow Sports
Soil & Water Conservation
Space Exploration
Sports
Stamp Collecting
Surveying
Sustainability
Swimming
Textile
Theater
Traffic Safety
Truck Transportation
Veterinary Medicine
Water Sports
Weather
Welding
Whitewater
Wilderness Survival
Wood Carving
Woodwork


SKU 654372
35711 2026 Printing