SWIMMING


SWIMMING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35957
ISBN 978-0-8395-3352-8
©2024 Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the
requirements, procedures, and techniques presented in this
pamphlet and ensuring that each Scout earning the merit
badge is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level
consistent with the requirements. In addition, counselors must
ensure that all applicable BSA safety policies, including Safe
Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are followed during training,
practice, and review.
Counselors for the Swimming merit badge must be registered
members of the Boy Scouts of America, have current training in
swimming (either Safe Swim Defense or Safety Afloat, or both),
and be approved by the local council advancement committee.
Councils with an aquatics committee should utilize that commit-
tee to coordinate with the advancement committee for approval
of qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge
and skills indicated by the requirements, experience in teaching
such skills to youth, and experience in identifying and managing
risks associated with the activities involved. This should include,
at minimum, current or previous certification as Aquatics
Instructor, BSA or instructor certification from the American Red
Cross or YMCA. The council advancement committee may
approve counselors with similar experience and training in
knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.
FPO


SWIMMING 3
Demonstrations or activities in the water must be con-
ducted according to BSA Safe Swim Defense standards,
which appear in the “Safety and First Aid” section.


4 SWIMMING
Emphasis on Stroke Mechanics
With the revisions to the Swimming merit badge requirements, the goal
is to emphasize teaching Scouts correct stroke mechanics. It is critical for
them to learn these strokes correctly, in good form and with proper breath-
ing, so they can swim with greater ease and efficiency. Furthermore, the
ability to correctly perform these strokes will make Scouts safer in and
around the water as well as when they tackle advanced water activities
such as the Lifesaving merit badge and BSA Lifeguard.


SWIMMING 5


6 SWIMMING
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Swimming or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.


SWIMMING 7





SWIMMING 9
Contents
Safety and First Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Swimming Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
Swimming Strokes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 39
Surface Dives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Swimming for Fitness and Health . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Swimming Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 63





SWIMMING 11
.Safety and First Aid
Safety and First Aid
Developed more than 60 years ago, the procedures included in
the Boy Scouts of America’s water safety plan have earned
Scouting what is believed to be the most commendable water
safety record of any youth organization in the United States.
BSA Safe Swim Defense
All swimming activities in Scouting must be conducted accord-
ing to BSA Safe Swim Defense standards. The eight points of
Safe Swim Defense are as follows.
1. Qualified Supervision
All swimming activity must be supervised by a
mature and conscientious adult age 21 or older
who understands and knowingly accepts
responsibility for the well-being and
safety of those in his or her care, and
who is trained in and committed to
compliance with the eight points of
BSA Safe Swim Defense.
It is strongly recommended that all
units have at least one adult or older
youth member currently trained in
BSA Aquatics Supervision:
Swimming and Water Rescue
or BSA Lifeguard to assist in the
planning and conducting of all
swimming activities.


12 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
2. Personal Health Review
A complete health history is required of all participants as
evidence of fitness for swimming activities. Forms for minors
must be signed by a parent or legal guardian.
Participants should be asked to relate any recent incidents of
illness or injury just prior to the activity. Supervision and protec-
tion should be adjusted to anticipate any potential risks associated
with individual health conditions. For significant health condi-
tions, the adult supervisor should require an examination by a
physician and consult with the parent, guardian, or caregiver for
appropriate precautions.
3. Safe Area
All swimming areas must be carefully inspected and pre-
pared for safety prior to each activity. Water depth, quality,
temperature, movement, and clarity are important consider-
ations. Hazards must be eliminated or isolated by conspicu-
ous markings and discussed with participants.
Controlled access. There must be safe areas for all participating
ability groups to enter and leave the water. Swimming areas of
appropriate depth must be defined for each ability group. The
entire area must be within easy reach of designated rescue per-
sonnel. The area must be clear of boat traffic, surfing, or other
nonswimming activities.


SWIMMING 13
.Safety and First Aid
Bottom conditions and depth. The bottom must be clear of
trees and debris. Abrupt changes in depth are not allowed in
the nonswimmer area. Isolated underwater hazards should be
marked with floats. Rescue personnel must be able to easily
reach the bottom. Maximum recommended water depth in clear
water is 12 feet. Maximum water depth in turbid water is 8 feet.
Visibility. Underwater swimming and diving are prohibited in
turbid water. Turbid water exists when a swimmer treading
water cannot see his feet. Swimming at night is allowed only in
areas with water clarity and lighting sufficient for good visibility
both above and below the surface.
Diving and elevated entry. Diving is permitted only into clear,
unobstructed water from heights no greater than 40 inches.
Water depth must be at least 7 feet. Bottom depth contours
below diving boards and elevated surfaces require greater water
depths and must conform to state regulations. Persons should
not jump into water from heights greater than they are tall, and
should jump only into water chest deep or greater with minimal
risk from contact with the bottom. No elevated entry is permitted
where the person must clear any obstacle, including land.
If your state,
city, or local
community
requires a water
depth greater
than 7 feet, it is
important to abide
by that mandate.


14 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
Water temperature. Comfortable water temperature for swim-
ming is near 80 degrees. Activity in water at 70 degrees or less
should be of limited duration and closely monitored for negative
effects of chilling.
Water quality. Bodies of stagnant, foul water, areas with signifi-
cant algae or foam, or areas polluted by livestock or waterfowl
should be avoided. Comply with any signs posted by local health
authorities. Swimming is not allowed in pools with green, murky,
or cloudy water.
Moving water. Participants should be able to easily regain and
maintain their footing in currents or waves. Areas with large
waves, swiftly flowing currents, or moderate currents that flow
toward the open sea or into areas of danger should be avoided.
Weather. Participants should be moved from the water to a
position of safety whenever lightning or thunder threatens.
Wait at least 30 minutes after the last lightning flash or thunder
before leaving shelter. Take precautions to prevent sunburn,
dehydration, and hypothermia.
Life jacket use. Swimming in clear water over 12 feet deep, in
turbid water over 8 feet deep, or in flowing water may be
allowed if all participants wear properly fitted, Coast Guard–
approved life jackets and the supervisor determines that
swimming with life jackets is safe under the circumstances.


SWIMMING 15
.Safety and First Aid
4. Response Personnel (Lifeguards)
Every swimming activity must be closely and continuously
monitored by a trained rescue team on the alert for and
ready to respond during emergencies.
Professionally trained lifeguards satisfy this need when provided
by a regulated facility or tour operator. When lifeguards are not
provided by others, the adult supervisor must assign at least two
rescue personnel, with additional numbers to maintain a ratio to
participants of one rescuer to every 10 participants. The supervi-
sor must provide instruction and rescue equipment and assign
areas of responsibility as outlined in the Aquatics Supervision,
No. 34346. The qualified supervisor, the designated response
personnel, and the lookout work together as a safety team. An
emergency action plan should be formulated by the safety team
and shared with participants as appropriate.


16 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
5. Lookout
The lookout continuously monitors the conduct of the
swim, identifies any departures from Safe Swim Defense
guidelines, alerts response personnel as needed, and
monitors the weather and environment.
The lookout should have a clear view of the entire area
but be close enough for easy verbal communication. The
lookout must have a sound understanding of Safe Swim Defense
but is not required to perform rescues. The adult supervisor
may serve simultaneously as the lookout but must assign the
task to someone else if engaged in activities that preclude
focused observation.
6. Ability Groups
All youth and adult participants are designated as swim-
mers, beginners, or nonswimmers based on swimming
ability confirmed by standardized BSA swim classification
tests. Each group is assigned a specific swimming area with
depths consistent with those abilities.
The classification tests should be renewed annually, preferably at
the beginning of the season even if the Scout has earned the
Swimming merit badge.
Swimmers pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the
head in depth. Level off and swim 75 yards in a strong manner
using one or more of the following strokes: sidestroke, breast-
stroke, trudgen, or crawl; then swim 25 yards using an easy rest-
ing backstroke. The 100 yards must be completed in one swim
without stops and must include at least one sharp turn. After
completing the swim, rest by floating.


SWIMMING 17
.Safety and First Aid
Beginners pass this test: Jump feetfirst into water over the
head in depth, level off, and swim 25 feet on the surface. Stop,
turn sharply, resume swimming, and return to the starting place.
Anyone who has not completed either the beginner or swimmer
tests is classified as a nonswimmer.
The nonswimmer area should be no more than waist to
chest deep and should be enclosed by physical boundaries such
as the shore, a pier, or lines. The enclosed beginner area should
contain water of standing depth and may extend to depths just
over the head. The swimmer area may be up to 12 feet in depth
in clear water and should be defined by floats or other markers.
7. Buddy System
Every participant is paired with
another participant. Buddies
stay together, monitor each
other, and alert the safety
team if either needs assistance
or is missing.
Buddies check into and out of the
area together. Buddies are nor-
mally in the same ability group
and remain in their assigned area.
If they are not of the same ability
group, then they swim in the area
assigned to the buddy with the
lesser ability.


18 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
A buddy check reminds participants of their obligation to
monitor their buddies and indicates how closely the buddies
are keeping track of each other. Roughly every 10 minutes, or as
needed to keep the buddies together, the lookout, or other per-
son designated by the supervisor, gives an audible signal, such
as a single whistle blast, and a call for “Buddies.” Buddies are
expected to raise each other’s hand before completion of a slow,
audible count to 10. Buddies who take longer to find each other
should be reminded of their responsibility for the other’s safety.
Once everyone has a buddy, a count is made by area and
compared with the total number known to be in the water. After
the count is confirmed, a signal is given to resume swimming.
8. Discipline
Rules are effective only when followed. All participants
should know, understand, and respect the rules and proce-
dures for safe swimming provided by Safe Swim Defense
guidelines. Applicable rules should be discussed prior to
the outing and reviewed for all participants at the water’s
edge just before the swimming activity begins.
People are more likely to follow directions when they know the
reasons for rules and procedures. Consistent, impartially applied
rules supported by skill and good judgment provide stepping-
stones to a safe, enjoyable outing.


SWIMMING 19
.Safety and First Aid
Pool and Surf Swimming
Safe Swim Defense applies to swimming at a beach, private or
public pool, wilderness pond, stream, lake, or anywhere Scouts
swim. Here are some additional points for the pool and the surf.
Pool. If the swimming activity is in a public facility where oth-
ers are using the pool at the same time and the pool operator
provides guard personnel, there may be no need for additional
Scout lifeguards and lookouts. However, there must always be
an adult supervisor who understands his or her responsibility and
ensures that the elements of Safe Swim Defense are followed. The
buddy system is also critically important, even in a public pool.
Even in a crowd, you are alone without protection if no one is
paying attention to your circumstances.
The rule that people swim only in water depths suited
to their ability also applies at pools. Most public pools divide
shallow and deep water. This may be enough for defining
appropriate swimming areas. If not, the supervisor should
clearly point out to participants the appropriate areas of the
public facility.
If you have a cramp while swimming in deep water and
cannot swim to safety, float on your back or survival
float and wait for help.


20 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
Rip Currents
The United States Lifesaving Association estimates that most rescues—
about 80 percent—at surf beaches involve swimmers caught in rip currents.
More than 100 swimmers die each year from this swimming hazard. Rip
currents are long, narrow sections of water that form after waves break and
the water goes back out. Rip currents form a funnel of current that moves
much faster than the current on either side. The current can be so strong
that it may be difficult or impossible to swim against it. It can carry an
unsuspecting swimmer long distances from shore and even out to sea.
Rip currents occur in oceans and any place where there are waves,
including bodies of water such as the Great Lakes. To avoid getting caught
in a rip current, do not swim near piers or jetties (walls built out into the
water to protect a harbor or beach). Rip currents are often hard to see, but
look for the following clues:
• An area having a noticeable difference in water color
• A channel of churning, choppy water
• A line of foam, seaweed, or debris moving steadily away from shore
• A break in the incoming wave pattern
If you are caught in a rip current, don’t fight it by swimming toward
the beach. Instead,
turn and escape by
swimming parallel
to the shore. If that
doesn’t work, float or
tread water. Call or
wave for help.
WAVES
BEACH


SWIMMING 21
.Safety and First Aid
Surf. The surf environment—with its wave action, currents,
tides, backwash, and sea life such as stinging jellyfish—
requires precautions for safe swimming that aren’t necessary in
other environments. A swimmer’s physical condition and skill
are very important and should enable the swimmer to recover
footing in waves, swim for long periods without getting worn
out, and remain calm and in control when faced with unex-
pected conditions.
Designated swimming areas are marked by flags or pennants
that are easy to see. Beginners and nonswimmers should be
positioned inshore from standing lifeguards who are equipped
with rescue equipment. Better swimmers are permitted seaward
of the lifeguards but must remain shoreward of anchored marker
buoys. The lifeguard-to-swimmer ratio should always be 1-to-10
with a rescue team supplied with a rescue tube or other flota-
tion aid stationed at the beach area.
Prevention goes hand in hand with mitigation, which
means “to lessen in force or intensity” and “to make
less severe.” By taking precautions to manage risk and
the possibility of injury, you can be prepared to antici-
pate, help prevent, mitigate, and respond to just about
any incident that might happen while swimming.
Unless your unit is experienced in ocean swimming,
it is probably best to swim at a beach with
professional lifeguards.


22 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
First Aid
Following Safe Swim Defense will eliminate any serious risks in
swimming, but remember to take proper precautions.
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature
falls below the normal range and the body cannot produce
enough heat. Early signs include bluish lips and shivering.
Further cooling will upset the victim’s ability to think clearly
and to do simple tasks. The person may appear groggy and
lack coordination. As cooling continues, the pulse rate slows
and blood is directed to the critical organs and away from the
extremities as the body attempts to prevent further heat loss.
The heart and lungs keep working at the expense of the hands,
feet, and brain. Further cooling will lead to unconsciousness
and even death.
The first treatment for hypothermia is to prevent further
heat loss. Once out of the water, the victim should not be allowed
to walk. Move the victim to warmth and shelter such as a build-
ing, tent, or vehicle. As soon as possible, remove wet clothing
and put on dry clothes or wrap the person in a blanket or dry
towels. If the victim is unconscious, open the airway and check
for breathing. You may apply warm (but not hot) towels or
items such as hot water bottles wrapped in a towel to only the
trunk, crotch, neck, and head. Do not rub the victim’s legs or
apply warming devices to the arms or legs. These actions may
cause more blood to flow to the surface of the skin and away
from vital organs. Finally, since even mild cases of hypothermia
place the body in a highly stressed condition, closely watch all
hypothermia victims for several hours even if they appear to
have recovered.
Dehydration happens when we lose more water than we
take in. Symptoms of mild dehydration include increased thirst,
dry lips, and dark yellow urine. Symptoms of moderate to severe
dehydration include severe thirst, dry mouth with little saliva,
dry skin, weakness, dizziness, confusion, nausea, cramping, loss
of appetite, decreased sweating (even with exertion), decreased
urine production, and dark brown urine.
Avoid dehydration by drinking plenty of fluids and
eating enough throughout the day to keep your body
well-balanced. If you become weary or develop a head-
ache or body aches, or if you become confused, rest in
the shade and sip water until the symptoms subside.


SWIMMING 23
.Safety and First Aid
For mild dehydration, drink a quart or two of water or
sports drink over two to four hours. Rest for 24 hours and
continue drinking fluids. See a medical doctor for moderate to
severe dehydration, which requires emergency care. Prevent
dehydration by drinking plenty of fluids whenever you are
swimming, in hot or cool weather. Drink enough so that your
urine stays clear.
Sunburn is a familiar condition that can occur during
swimming activities. Reflected sunlight from the water can be
as damaging as direct exposure. To prevent sunburn, cover up
and use a waterproof sunscreen with a sun protection factor,
or SPF, of at least 30. Reapply sunscreen often whenever you
are swimming, and limit your time in the sun. If your skin
begins to redden or feel painful, get out of the sun. To treat
sunburn, apply clean, web compresses (cloths, towels, or gauze
pads) dipped in cool water. Protect the burned area from further
sun exposure.
Heat reactions, including heat exhaustion and heatstroke,
result when the body can’t keep itself cool enough. Symptoms of
heat exhaustion may include dizziness, faintness, nausea, and a
severe lack of energy. A person also may develop a headache, mus-
cle cramps, and rapid pulse; look pale; and be sweating heavily.
To treat heat exhaustion, have the victim lie down in a cool, shady
spot with the feet raised. Loosen clothing and cool the person with
a damp cloth or a fan. Have him or her sip water. Recovery should
be rapid. If the condition worsens, get medical help.
Most sunburns are first-degree burns,
but repeated sunburn over a long period
of time can cause skin damage and
increase the risk of skin cancer. It’s best
to prevent sunburn by using plenty of
sunscreen—even on cloudy days—with
a sun protection factor (SPF) rating of at
least 30. Wear a hat and cover up when-
ever you are not swimming. If you have
to treat a painful sunburn, use a cool,
wet cloth and change it frequently.
Find shade. Waiting until a sunburn appears
means you have waited too long
to protect your skin.


24 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
Heatstroke is the extreme, life-threatening stage of a heat
reaction in which dehydration (water loss) has caused a very
high body temperature. The victim’s cooling system has started
to fail, and the person’s core temperature is at a dangerously
high level. In addition to any symptoms of heat exhaustion,
heatstroke symptoms can include hot, sweaty, red skin, confu-
sion, and disorientation; the victim may be unconscious. The
victim must be cooled immediately. Loosen tight clothing, fan
the person, and apply wet towels. If you have ice packs, wrap
them in a thin barrier (such as a T-shirt) and place them under
the armpits and against the neck and groin area. If the person is
able to drink, give small amounts of cool water. Treat for shock
and seek emergency medical help.
Muscle cramps, sometimes called muscle spasms, occur
when muscles are not getting enough oxygen or nutrients or
when the blood flow cannot prevent the build-up of wastes
in muscles. Vigorous exercise and sweating can cause muscle
cramps in the limbs. Cold water or cold weather increases the
likelihood of cramping. Sudden, vigorous exercise without proper
warm-up also can increase the risk of muscle cramps. If a muscle
begins to cramp while you are swimming, get out of the water
and massage the cramp. If conditions are hot, cool down and
drink fluids. If conditions are cold, find warmth and cover. Rub
the cramping muscles to improve circulation.
Hyperventilation is the result of overbreathing, either
deliberately or as a result of panic. Hyperventilating decreases
the level of carbon dioxide in the blood and suppresses the
breathing reflex. The likely result is dizziness and fainting.
Hyperventilation from panic is not likely to occur in swimming
if all participants stay in water suited to their individual skill
levels and the activity is properly supervised and disciplined.
Swimmers who become panicky should be removed from the
water and calmed. Before resuming any water activity, deter-
mine and resolve the cause of the panic. Foolish swimmers may
deliberately hyperventilate to suppress the breathing reflex for
underwater swimming. This is dangerous and puts swimmers
at high risk. Such conduct is prohibited and should be sharply
disciplined.
Prevent heat reactions by drinking plenty of fluids and
limiting time out in the open on hot days.


SWIMMING 25
.Safety and First Aid
Spinal injuries can occur from diving into shallow or
obstructed water. Rescuers must be very careful when a spinal
injury is suspected. Spinal injuries can be fatal or can cause
paralysis. If the victim is not handled properly, additional seri-
ous injury could result. Moving a victim is an extremely delicate
task best left to trained emergency personnel, but if no one else
is present you may need to act. In a swimming accident, you
may have to move the victim to prevent drowning or to perform
rescue breathing.
When tending to a suspected spinal injury victim, move
the victim’s head, neck, and back as little as possible. The
technique used to limit this movement is called in-line stabi-
lization. For information on this technique, see the chapter
concerning spinal injury management in the Lifesaving merit
badge pamphlet.
Stings and bites are not a common hazard when swim-
ming in pools or lakes, but in saltwater swimmers may suffer
severe stings from certain types of jellyfish or other saltwater
creatures. Knowing the body of water you are swimming in and
avoiding possible contact with dangerous sea animals is the best
strategy. For jellyfish stings, soak the area with vinegar or alco-
hol, or cover with a paste of baking soda mixed with water. Get
medical help if the pain is severe; if the pain does not let up in a
short time; or if the victim has an
allergic reaction, feels dizzy, or has
trouble breathing. For typical insect
stings and bites, apply basic first
aid as described in the Scouts BSA
Handbook for Boys and Scouts BSA
Handbook for Girls, or the First
Aid merit badge pamphlet.


26 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
Cuts and scrapes may occur on the feet when swimming
in natural waters if the bottom has not been carefully checked
for hazards. In pool swimming, such injuries are more likely
when climbing in and out of the water without being careful
along rough edges or corners. As in other situations, the wound
should be cleaned, disinfected, and covered. The patrol first-aid
kit should contain appropriate supplies for minor wound
treatment. For severe bleeding injuries, control bleeding with
direct pressure or at pressure points until emergency medical
help arrives.
Speaking of stings and bites, if you will be swimming
in the ocean, beware of sharks and stingrays. (Although
bull sharks have been known to inhabit the waterways
of the Mississippi!) The possibility of a shark bite or con-
tact with a stingray is pretty remote, but play it safe by
finding out what you can about the area where you will
be swimming before you decide to dive in.


SWIMMING 27
.Safety and First Aid
Survival Skills
Cold Water
When a person is in cold water, the skin and nearby tissues cool
quickly. The body immediately begins producing heat to rewarm
the skin and to prevent the cooling of vital organs. Hypothermia
occurs when the body loses heat faster than it can produce it,
which causes the internal body temperature to decrease.
Water or air temperature lower than 70 degrees poses hypo-
thermia risks. If goose bumps appear on wet skin shortly after
leaving the water, then the air temperature should be considered
cold and swimmers should take proper precautions. The first
protection for cold-water activity is to reduce the length of time
in or on the water. At 70 degrees, maximum safe in-the-water
time is approximately 20 minutes. Open-water swimming in
temperatures of 65 degrees or lower may pose substantial risks
and should be avoided. In all swimming activities, precautions
should include procedures and equipment for immediate warm-
ing of anyone showing symptoms of chill.
Moving water and wind substantially increase the loss
of body heat. Swimming and treading water also cool
the body faster than remaining still.
Activities Afloat
For all activity afloat on cold water or in cold weather,
wear appropriate clothing to keep you warm. You
should wear a life jacket at all times, normally on top of
the outermost garment. Have a dry change of clothes
available in case of a spill. As in swimming, preparation
and plans for any activity afloat should include proce-
dures and equipment for warming anyone showing
symptoms of chill. Overboard activity is not recom-
mended in water temperatures of 65 degrees or lower,
except for closely supervised capsize skills training in
preparation for activity afloat.


28 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
A properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard–
approved life jacket should be worn for
all activities afloat in small craft. The life jacket
will help keep you afloat. In addition, it can
provide insulation and significantly reduce
heat loss in cold water that could lead
to hypothermia.
If you are alone in cold water and more
than a short distance from safety, your best
strategy is to float motionless. This will help
you conserve heat. Keep your life jacket and
all clothing on for insulation. Heat loss is most
rapid from the head and crotch.
Because water will move heat away
from the body faster than air, keeping your
face and head in the water will speed up heat
loss. Vigorous swimming will chill you most
rapidly. Treading water is tiring and will pro-
duce heat loss almost as rapidly as swimming.
Survival floating, or drown-proofing (described
later in this chapter), might be somewhat
better than swimming or treading water if your movements
are slow and limited, but submerging the head and face will
increase heat loss.
For treading water, you can use the
rotary kick, but do so sparingly. Your
body will tire quickly and lose heat
rapidly when treading water.


SWIMMING 29
.Safety and First Aid
For these reasons, your best cold-water survival strategy
is to float motionless with your life jacket and clothes on, your
head out of the water, and your legs drawn up close to your
chest. This is called the heat escape lessening posture (HELP).
If you are stranded in cold water with one or more persons, you
should huddle together to reduce the cold-water contact and con-
serve heat. To do this, press together tightly and float motionless.
HELP (heat escape lessening posture) Huddle together with sides touching.
Surviving in Cold Water
• Wear a life jacket.
• Keep your head out of the water.
• Get out of the water onto your boat, a log, a raft, or
anything that floats.
• Remain as still as possible while in the water.
• While afloat in the water, do not attempt to swim
unless it is to reach a nearby craft, fellow survivor,
or floating object that you can lean on or climb onto.
• If there is more than one person in the water, hud-
dling is recommended while waiting to be rescued.
• Maintain a positive mental attitude. Never give
up hope.


30 SWIMMING
Safety and First Aid.
Survival Floating
What if you find yourself in deep water without flotation sup-
port and too far from shore to swim? Perhaps you were swept
out to sea by an unusually strong current or thrown overboard
from a boat in strong waves. You must keep yourself afloat until
help arrives. Floating on your back is a good plan if there are no
waves. Another possibility is survival floating, or drown-proofing,
which will work even if you are being tossed around by wind
and waves.


SWIMMING 31
.Safety and First Aid
Survival floating, or drown-proofing
To survival float, begin by taking a breath, putting your face
in the water, and floating facedown in a relaxed position (the
jellyfish float). For most people, the back of the neck will break
the surface of the water. After holding your breath for a comfort-
able length of time, begin to exhale slowly while spreading your
legs and bringing your arms up near the surface. As you exhale,
bring your legs together and push gently down with your arms.
This movement should give you just enough lift to raise your
head and mouth above the surface for a quick breath. After get-
ting your breath, lower your head and immediately return to
your relaxed, facedown position.
Several different arm and leg movements (such as an
occasional slow scissors kick) may work well when survival
floating. Experiment and practice to find what works best for
you. Remember: Less movement is better because you are trying
to conserve your energy. Slow, relaxed movement is better than
quick or precise movements that take more energy.
As you practice survival floating, you may find that you
need to keep your head above water longer than one quick
inhalation and that you end up briefly treading water. This will
quickly tire you. To correct the problem, be sure to exhale com-
pletely while your head is down in the water. Practice survival
floating until it becomes easy for you to make slow movements
and to exhale in the water and lift your head just enough for
one quick breath. Remember to relax—it may be a long wait.





SWIMMING 33
.Swimming Skills
Swimming Skills
One of the most important elements of safety in the water is the
ability to swim. Strong swimmers can swim a reasonable dis-
tance with a confident, steady stroke. But strong swimmers are
not safe swimmers until they can make a safe water entry, swim
a restful stroke, and maintain themselves in the water when
hurt or exhausted.
All First Class Scouts have demonstrated that they are strong,
safe swimmers who have mastered certain in-water skills. The
BSA swimmer test—required for First Class advancement—
includes these in-water skills and represents the minimum level of
ability for safe deepwater swimming. Consider the components of
the test:
1. “Jump feetfirst into water over your head in depth, . . .”
You must be able to make an abrupt entry into deep water and
begin swimming without any aids. Walking in from shallow
water, easing in from the edge or down a ladder, pushing off
from a pool’s side or bottom, and gaining forward momentum
by diving do not satisfy this requirement.
2. “. . . swim 75 yards in a strong manner using one or more
of the following strokes: sidestroke, breaststroke, trudgen,
or crawl; . . .”
You must be able to cover distance with a strong, confident
stroke. The 75 yards must not be the outer limit of your ability.
You should be able to complete the distance and still have
enough stamina to avoid undue risks. Dog paddling and strokes
repeatedly interrupted and restarted are insufficient, and under-
water swimming is not allowed. The strokes listed above may
include variations. Any strong sidestroke or breaststroke, or any
strong overarm stroke—including the back crawl—is acceptable.


34 SWIMMING
Swimming Skills.
3. “. . . then swim 25 yards using an easy, resting backstroke. . . .”
You must perform a restful, free-breathing backstroke that can be
used to avoid exhaustion during swimming activity. This part of
the test will need to follow a more strenuous swimming activity
to show that you can, in fact, use the backstroke to rest and
recover. You must accomplish the change of stroke in deep water
without any push-off or other aid. Any variation of the elemen-
tary backstroke is acceptable. The back crawl may be used if it
clearly allows you to rest and catch your breath.
4. “. . . The 100 yards must be swum continuously and include
at least one sharp turn. . . .”
You must cover the total distance without stopping. The sharp
turn demonstrates your ability to reverse direction in deep water
without assistance or a push-off from the side or bottom.
5. “. . . After completing the swim, rest by floating.”
This critically important part of the test evaluates your ability to
maintain yourself in the water indefinitely even though
exhausted or otherwise unable to keep swimming. Treading
water or swimming in place will further tire you and therefore is
unacceptable. The length of the float test is not important,
except that it must be long enough for the tester to determine
that you are resting and likely could continue to do so for a pro-
longed period. Drown-proofing may be sufficient if it is clearly
restful, but it is not preferred. If the test is completed except for
the floating requirement, you may be retested on the floating
(after instruction) only if the tester feels confident that you can
initiate the float when exhausted.


SWIMMING 35
.Swimming Skills
Leaping entry (stride jump)
Entering the Water
Get into the habit of entering the water feetfirst whenever you
practice swimming skills. This will protect your head and neck
from being injured by unseen objects below the surface or when
the water is shallower than you think. It is always safer to learn
and practice entries in water that is over your head in depth.
Leaping Entry (Stride Jump)
Stand with both feet near the edge of the pier or pool.
The water should be at least 5 feet deep. Lean for-
ward and step far out over the water while pushing
off with the other foot. Keep your arms straight and
slightly to the side. Keep your head up by looking for-
ward. You should lean into and move out over the
water, not jump up. Limit the height of the starting point to 3 feet
above the water. As your feet and legs enter the water, snap them
together as in a scissors kick. Bring your arms straight down in a
slapping motion to break your entry into the water. Timing is key;
if you do it right, you won’t even get your chin wet. In lifesaving,
this entry allows you to keep your subject constantly in sight.
3 FEET MAXIMUM
ABOVE THE WATER
MINIMUM WATER
DEPTH OF 5 FEET


36 SWIMMING
Swimming Skills.
Floating
Floating faceup is the most restful way to maintain yourself in
deep water. This simple skill requires buoyancy and balance.
Buoyancy is the ability to float. Your body has two balancing
points known as the center of buoyancy and the center of weight.
When you are floating, your body’s center of buoyancy is in
your chest. The air in your lungs is mainly what keeps you
afloat. Your body’s center of weight is lower—about the level of
your hips. Your hips and legs are quite heavy, because they are
made of muscle and bone. In the water, gravity pulls your hips
and legs down, while the air in your lungs makes the upper part
of your body more buoyant. When you try to float on your back,
your legs and feet sink and your head and chest rise.
To float without moving, you need to adjust your body
so that the center of buoyancy is directly above the center of
weight. For many people, this means floating with the feet well
below the surface and only the head or mouth at the water’s
surface. When floating, some swimmers are positioned almost
vertically in the water.
It is possible to float in a more horizontal position. You can-
not change your center of buoyancy, because you cannot change
the position of your lungs. You can, however, change your cen-
ter of weight. To change your center of weight when floating,
move your arms away from your sides and above your head.
Bend your legs at the knees and let your feet sink or pull your
feet up behind and underneath you. This will shift your center
of weight closer to your center of buoyancy.
Practice floating in chest-deep water. Start from a stand-
ing position. Take a deep breath and hold it. Bend your knees
slightly and lean backward, arching your back and moving your
neck backward until your ears are in the water and your chin
is your highest point. Slowly move your hands and arms away
from your sides with your palms up. Keep your arms and hands
in the water and move them so they form a Y above your
shoulders. Having your arms well past your shoulders will help
balance the weight of your legs and feet. Do not try to arm stroke
or kick into a higher position, because this will throw off your
balance. Relax and let your body settle into its natural floating
level and position in the water.
Whenever you
are floating, try
to keep your
lungs well
inflated with
air. This will
help you
remain buoyant.


SWIMMING 37
.Swimming Skills
Remember, the natural floating position
for many people is with their legs and feet
hanging down almost vertically. Others float
high on the water with their hips and legs
near the surface. Begin by holding your float
position as long as you can hold your breath.
When you need to breathe, quickly exhale and
then breathe in fresh air through your nose or
mouth to keep your lungs filled with as much
air as possible. As your floating experience
and confidence increase, you will be able to
breathe in a more relaxed and natural rhythm.





SWIMMING 39
.Swimming Strokes
Swimming Strokes
To earn the Swimming merit badge you must demonstrate
your swimming strength and stroke proficiency by
swimming 150 yards using a combination of five
strokes. You must swim continuously in a strong
manner for the entire distance and show good
form on the front crawl or trudgen for 25
yards, the back crawl for 25 yards, the side-
stroke for 25 yards, the breaststroke for 25
yards, and the elementary backstroke for
50 yards.
“Good form” means that you need to
perform each stroke with the technique
described in this pamphlet. For example, the
breaststroke is a restful stroke that includes
a long, prone glide between strokes. If your
breaststroke is a vigorous, bobbing stroke as used
in competition, it is not satisfactory for this require-
ment. Doing the backstroke using a frog kick rather than
a whip kick also is unacceptable for this requirement.
You also are required to swim the specified strokes in a
“strong manner.” This means no rest stops and no gasping,
panting finishes. The stroke sequence begins with the more
strenuous strokes and moves through to the more restful
strokes, with the last stroke being the most restful. You should
follow the stroke sequence as presented in the requirement. If
you complete the swim “in a strong manner” in the specified
sequence, then you should be rested and able to continue well
beyond the 150-yard requirement.
On the following pages, you will find the required strokes
illustrated and explained as you should swim them to complete
requirement 3.


40 SWIMMING
Swimming Strokes.
Front Crawl
The front crawl has three parts: the flutter kick, the rotating arm
stroke, and rhythmic breathing. It is the fastest and one of the
most graceful of all swimming strokes.
Front crawl, side and front views
In competition,
the crawl stroke is
called “freestyle.”


SWIMMING 41
.Swimming Strokes
Kick. The flutter kick relies on relaxed ankles and the use
of the entire leg. The movement begins at the hips and
flows to the feet. As one foot moves downward, the other
comes up in a beating, or fluttering, rhythm. Kick from
the hip and thigh, not from the knee. During the down-
ward part of the kick, your ankle stays relaxed, toes are
pointed behind you, and your knee is slightly bent. As your
foot reaches the end of the kick, straighten your leg and allow
your foot to snap downward. As your foot moves upward,
keep that leg and knee straight.
The kick should be smooth and steady, and your feet
should stay just under the water with only your heels breaking
the surface. Your big toes should almost touch one another as
they pass. The number of kicks, or beats, during one complete arm
cycle can vary. For swimming short distances, six kicks per arm
cycle works well. You can practice the kick by holding the edge
of the pool or by supporting yourself on a kickboard.
Arm Stroke. Most of the forward motion of the front crawl
comes from the arm stroke. After diving or pushing off on your
stomach with your arms out in front of you, begin the arm
stroke with your hands just below the surface. Keep your hands
relaxed with your fingers loosely cupped. The water level should
be right above your eyebrows; any higher will drive the body
down. Look forward and slightly down so you can see where
you are going. Avoid looking straight down or bobbing your
head up and down.
The arm stroke has three phases: catch, power, and recov-
ery—or CPR. To begin the catch, slightly bend your right wrist
and elbow as you move the entire arm downward. Have your
palm facing away from your body. Keep your elbow, hand, and
wrist fixed in this position. Your hand should be directly in line
with your shoulder.
Flutter kick
The catch phase of the arm stroke is called the “catch”
because it feels like your palm and upper arm have
grabbed hold of something.


42 SWIMMING
Swimming Strokes.
For the power phase, straighten your wrist and bend the
elbow so your forearm is about 45 degrees from the upper arm.
Point your fingers down and inward. Push hard against the water,
and sweep your hand and forearm down and back under your
chest. Your hand will pass just a few inches from the centerline of
your body. Your palm should be flat and should push backward
against the water. As your hand becomes level with your shoul-
der, begin to straighten out your arm as it continues to move
back and out to just beside your right hip. Your upper body will
roll, with your left hip turning down and toward the centerline.
This turns your right hip up toward the top of the water just as
your right hand reaches the end of the power phase.
As your hand exits the water, the recovery phase begins.
Start by lifting your elbow up and forward. Keep your wrist
and hand relaxed and trailing behind or hanging below your
elbow. As your hand passes the shoulder, it reaches up and
forward to enter the water again when it is at shoulder level.
When your thumb is even with your eye and your arm is
straightened to about three-quarters of its length, allow your
fingertips to smoothly enter the water. Rotate your hand so that
your thumb enters first as your arm straightens under the water
to its full length.
Breathing and Coordination. Swimmers doing the front crawl
use a breathing rhythm of one breath for every one, two, three,
or more arm cycles. For the purpose of learning and demonstrat-
ing the front crawl, you should take a breath for every set of arm
cycles on the same side. When your face is in the water, slowly
exhale through your nose and mouth.
When you need to take a breath, exhale all of the remain-
ing air into the water during the power phase of the arm stroke.
As your body rotates during the middle of the power phase, start
turning your head so that your mouth is out of the water just as
your hand exits by your hip. At the beginning of the recovery
phase, inhale quickly and return your head to its former posi-
tion. Take a breath every arm cycle until you can do it without
having to pause. When the stroke is performed correctly, a wave
will form around your head as you turn to breathe. Your mouth
will be located in the trough of the wave.


SWIMMING 43
.Swimming Strokes
Back Crawl
The back crawl, or backstroke, has two parts: a flutter kick and
a continuous arm stroke. There is no rhythmic breathing since
the face and mouth are above the water.
Kick. The back crawl kick is similar to the
front crawl flutter kick but is done deeper in
the water. The legs alternate, with the
upward kick being the most forceful. Your
ankles remain flexible and your toes point
away from your head at all times. This
allows your feet to function like divers’ fins.
On the downward part of the kick, keep your
leg and knee straight. For the upward part of
the kick, bend your knee and kick from the
hip as if you were punting a football with
the top of your foot. When your knee is just
a few inches below the surface, stop the
upward motion of the thigh and straighten
the knee and leg. Remember to keep your
ankles relaxed, so your feet will respond to
the water pressure as your legs move.
Arm Stroke. The arm stroke for the back
crawl involves alternating the arms, much
like the front crawl arm stroke. You can start
the arm stroke by pushing off on your back
with both arms at your side and then lifting
one arm out of the water, keeping it straight.
When your arm is at 90 degrees to your
body, your hand rolls so that your thumb
now points toward your feet. As your arm
moves back toward your head, roll a little
onto the same side and drop your shoulder
a bit deeper in the water. Your hand should
enter the water little finger first. Your palm
should face out and your wrist should be
slightly bent. Allow your hand to slice down
into the water until it is 8 to 12 inches
below the surface. Your hand is now in the
catch position. At the same time, start lifting
your other arm out of the water for its
recovery phase so that it will enter the
water when the first arm has finished the
power phase.
Back crawl, side and front views


44 SWIMMING
Swimming Strokes.
The key to the power phase of the arm stroke is bending
your elbow and pushing against the water with your hand
toward your feet. Do not try to keep your arm straight, which
will either pull it to the side of your body or up toward the
surface. As your hand moves from the catch position, begin
to bend your elbow so that it points toward the bottom of the
lake or pool. Keep your elbow bent and pull directly toward
your feet with your entire arm. In the water, keep your hand
higher than your elbow. About halfway through the power
phase, your elbow will be bent 90 degrees and your hand
will move toward the surface of the water.
The second half of the power phase involves using your
hand to push the water toward your hip and straightening out
your arm. At the very end of the power phase, flip your hand
downward as it passes your thigh. Your palm will be facing the
bottom and your arm will be fully straightened. This downward
motion of the hand will cause your body to roll to the opposite
side just as your other hand is entering the water. This raises your
shoulder to make it easier to recover the arm while the opposite
shoulder goes deeper into the water for its catch position.
The recovery phase is intended to give the arm muscles a
rest. Begin by lifting your arm straight up in the air so your thumb
and back of your hand leave the water first. Relax your hand,
wrist, arm, and back muscles, but do not bend your elbow. Move
your arm in a half-circle motion. The opposite arm will follow
the same pattern, beginning its pull as your body rolls toward
that side to begin the recovery of the first arm. Your arms are
directly opposite each other at all times.
Breathing and Coordination. Body position is important for
the back crawl. Be sure to keep your hips up and avoid a partial
sitting position. Your head should be back with your ears in the
water. Avoid turning your head from side to side, because your
head position serves to anchor and steady the entire stroke. To
coordinate arm and leg movements, count a six-beat kick (each
upward leg kick is one beat) and complete one full arm cycle in
six beats. In other words, one arm should enter the water on the
count of one, and the opposite arm should enter the water on
the count of four. Although the back crawl is a free-breathing
stroke, you should develop a breathing rhythm that feels com-
fortable to you. The simplest pattern is to inhale when one arm
recovers and exhale when the other arm recovers.
The back crawl
can be used
for recreational
swimming and
in competition.


SWIMMING 45
.Swimming Strokes
Sidestroke
The sidestroke is a good long-distance stroke with a long, restful
glide. It also introduces the scissors kick, which is used in swim-
ming rescues. The scissors kick is mainly responsible for the
forward motion of the stroke.
Kick. The scissors kick is a powerful kick that provides a resting
period between arm strokes. To do the scissors kick, bring your
knees together and then bend them as you bring your lower legs
and heels toward the buttocks. Without pausing, move your
legs into the catch position. Move your top leg forward and your
bottom leg back until your legs and knees are straight. To move
into the power phase, bring both legs back together with a force-
ful snapping motion like closing a pair of scissors. Keep your legs
together during the glide position with the toes pointed back.
Sidestroke, side and top views


46 SWIMMING
Arm Stroke. Start in the glide position on your side with one ear
in the water and the nose, mouth, and other ear out of the water.
With your body on its side, straighten the leading (bottom) arm
to its full length with your ear resting on your shoulder and your
palm facedown. The trailing (top) arm should rest comfortably
alongside your body with the hand above the thigh. Turn the palm
of the leading arm from facing down until it is vertical with the
thumb on top. Begin moving the leading arm into a catch position
by moving the hand in a downward direction toward the feet.
The power phase is a pull with the hand just below the top
of the water and the elbow bent. Move your leading arm until it
reaches the middle of your chest, while you move your trailing
arm up the side of your body. Both hands should arrive at the
same time in front of the upper chest. The trailing arm begins
its catch and power phases while the leading arm recovers by
moving back into the glide position. Reach out straight out from
your shoulder with the trailing arm. Use your hand and arm to
push the water toward your feet while they move to the side of
your body. Keep both arms straight during the glide, or resting
phase of the stroke.
Breathing and Coordination. In the sidestroke, the arm strokes
and scissors kick are combined so that the legs are drawn up as
the leading and trailing arms move toward the chest. To help
coordinate your arms and legs in the sidestroke, remember the
phrase, “pull, kick, glide.” Start by moving your legs into the
catch position. With your trailing arm straight and your legs
apart for the scissors kick, the power phases for both the trailing
arm and kick begin and end at the same time. During this time
the leading arm recovers to the glide position. When you have
finished both the kick and trailing arm stroke, rest and relax
your muscles. Hold the glide position for three or four counts
and then repeat the stroke. Breathing is easy with the sidestroke
since the mouth is out of the water. Breathe in during the power
phase of the leading arm and breathe out during the power
phase of the trailing arm.
Swimming Strokes.


SWIMMING 47
.Swimming Strokes
Trudgen
There are several variations of the trudgen,
including the trudgen crawl and the double
trudgen. Swimmers use the trudgen and its
variations, because they take less energy
than the front crawl.
Kick. The trudgen uses the scissors kick.
Between kicks, the legs rest and trail in the
water. The scissors kick usually is shorter
in the trudgen than in the sidestroke.
Arm Stroke. The arm strokes are the
same as those for the front crawl.
Breathing and Coordination. Coordinate
the arm movements and scissors kick
as in the sidestroke. If you are doing the
trudgen crawl, do two or three flutter
kicks between scissors kicks. In the double
trudgen, there are two scissors kicks for
each arm cycle but no flutter kicks. Roll
onto your side to breathe. As the arm on
your breathing side completes the power
phase and begins the recovery phase, turn
on your side and take a breath.
Trudgen, side view
This interesting stroke was named
for English swimmer John Trudgen,
who introduced the stroke in
competition in 1875.


48 SWIMMING
Swimming Strokes.
Breaststroke
Variations of the breaststroke range from a restful distance stroke
to a competitive racing stroke. With a longer glide as taught in
Scouting, the breaststroke is a powerful, long-distance stroke
that conserves energy and has applications in lifesaving. The
stroke uses a whip kick and a shallow arm pull.
Kick. The breaststroke kick, or whip kick, starts in the glide
position. Bring your heels toward the hips at about a 45-degree
angle, just beneath the water’s surface. You don’t want to break
the surface of the water. Keeping your knees bent, spread your
knees until they are no farther apart than hip width. Your feet
must be farther apart than your knees. Keep your ankles fully
flexed and your toes pointed outward. This is the catch position.
The breaststroke
is one of the
oldest strokes
used in Scouting.
Breaststroke, side and front views


SWIMMING 49
.Swimming Strokes
To begin the power phase, move your feet and lower legs in a
whipping motion, pushing outward and backward until your legs
and feet are touching in a glide position. At the end of the power
phase, your toes should be pointed back and away from your
body. As in the scissors kick, the speed of the whip kick should
increase rapidly and continue until the end of the kick.
Arm Stroke. Start from a prone float with your arms out straight.
Slightly bend your wrists and point your fingers downward. Turn
your hands to a slightly palms-out position. Then bend your
arms a little at the elbows as the palms and arms push out and
down until your hands are farther apart than the width of your
shoulders. This is the catch position. Begin the power phase by
pressing your arms and palms downward until your elbows
form a 90-degree angle, with your forearms pointing toward
the bottom. During the power phase, your hands and forearms
should always be below the elbows and your elbows should
always be below your shoulders. The arm pull should feel as
though you are grabbing the water ahead of you and pulling
yourself forward until your head passes your hands. Begin the
recovery phase by bringing your hands in together under the chin
and your elbows to the sides of your body. Finish the recovery
by pushing your hands forward just under the surface, fingers
leading, until your arms are at their full length in a glide position.
Breathing and Coordination. While doing the breaststroke, you
should exhale slowly in the water between breaths. Between the
catch and the power phase, lift your chin out of the water, finish
exhaling, and quickly take a breath. As your arms begin the
recovery phase, place your chin and face back in the water. The
water level should be right above the eyebrows. Avoid lifting your
head and shoulders too far out of the water to prevent bobbing
and losing forward momentum.
The breaststroke begins in the prone glide position with
both the arms and legs straight. To coordinate the kick, the arm
stokes, and the breathing, think of the phrase, “pull, breathe,
kick, glide.” As your arms complete the power phase, take a
breath, and then draw your feet toward the hips. When your
arms are about halfway through the recovery phase, begin the
whip kick. Time the arm strokes and kick so that the arms and
legs are both at their full length as the kick finishes. Rest in the
prone position as your body glides through the water. When the
glide begins slow down, it is time to start another stroke.
The pattern
the hands
trace in the
breaststroke
is sometimes
described as
an upside-
down heart.


50 SWIMMING
Swimming Strokes.
Elementary backstroke, side and top views


SWIMMING 51
.Swimming Strokes
Elementary Backstroke
The elementary backstroke is the resting stroke for the last
50 yards of your test. Use this stroke for long-distance swimming
or when you are tiring and want to rest while continuing to make
forward progress.
Kick. The elementary backstroke uses the whip kick. Floating on
your back, spread your knees no farther apart than hip width.
Drop your heels by bending your knees. Keep your knees just
below the surface. Turn your feet so your toes are pointing out
and your ankles are fully flexed up. This is the catch position.
To begin the power phase, move your feet and lower legs in a
whipping motion to trace an oval shape. Your feet must move
outward wider than the position of your knees and act like pad-
dles to push the water behind you. Then kick with your legs
ending up straight with your feet touching. Your toes should be
pointed and just below the water’s surface. Drop your heels down
to begin the recovery phase.
Arm Stroke. The arm stroke for the elementary backstroke is
simple. Start on your back in the glide position. Keep your legs
straight with your toes pointed and have your arms at your sides
with your hands on your thighs. Slowly move your hands either
up the centerline of your chest or up the sides of your body with
your elbows tucked in until your hands reach the shoulders.
Without pausing, straighten out your arms with your palms
facing your feet. In a single motion, sweep your arms quickly
toward your feet, bending your elbows and wrists throughout the
stroke to push water backward. Recover the arms by bringing
your hands back up toward your shoulders.
Breathing and Coordination. In the elementary backstroke,
the arms and the legs provide power at the same time. The kick
takes less time than the arms because the legs move a shorter
distance than the arms, and they are stronger. For these reasons,
you should begin the recovery of the arms before the legs. Don’t
begin the kick until your arms have begun their power phase.
With some practice, you should be able to time it so that you
finish both the kick and arm stroke together. Strive to make your
movements continuous. At the conclusion of the stroke, relax
and allow your body to glide through the water for three or four
counts. Don’t be in a hurry. Remember, this is a resting stroke.
As you finish your glide, repeat the process.
To avoid getting
water in your
mouth and
nose, keep your
forehead slightly
higher than your
chin as your
arms push
toward your feet.





SWIMMING 53
.Surface Dives
Surface Dives
If you want to swim underwater to retrieve an object or explore
the bottom, a surface dive is an easy way of going down. This
swimming skill is commonly used in snorkeling and lifesaving.
There are two ways to do a surface dive: feetfirst from an upright
position or headfirst from a forward swimming position.
Feetfirst Surface Dive
Feetfirst surface dives are particularly useful when you are
uncertain of the bottom conditions where you are swimming.
While treading water in an upright position, raise yourself partly
out of the water by snapping your legs together in a scissors
kick and pressing your hands down on the water. Then let
yourself sink. As your face goes under, turn your palms out
and press upward with your arms and hands. Doing this will
send you down fast. Be sure to keep your hands in the water
while pushing up. Keep your feet together and toes pointed to
streamline your body. When you near the bottom, change to
a swimming position by pulling your knees in until you are
tucked. Drop your head and start an underwater breaststroke.
Feetfirst surface dive


54 SWIMMING
Surface Dives.
Headfirst Surface Dives
The easiest way to do the headfirst pike surface dive is while
moving forward with a breaststroke. As you begin a new arm
stroke, keep your legs in the glide position and bend sharply at
the waist with your head down so that the upper portion of your
body is angled toward the bottom. Then reverse the direction of
your arm stroke while lifting your legs out of the water and into
the air. When you complete the reverse arm motion and leg lift,
you will be in a vertical handstand position with your body
straight and your arms straight and pointing toward the bottom.
In this streamlined position, the weight of your legs above the
water will drive you downward. It all should happen quickly in
one smooth motion. Once your feet are underwater, you can
begin to swim. If you want to go deeper or faster after you are
completely beneath the surface, use the breaststroke, which you
also can use to swim along the bottom.
A tuck surface dive is another option you can use to fulfill
requirement 6b. Instead of lifting your legs as you would for a
pike surface dive, pull your knees toward your chest and push
them upward as you point your head and arms toward the
bottom. The tuck might be a bit easier than the pike
to learn at first, but you will not dive as deep or
as quickly.
Headfirst surface dive in pike position


SWIMMING 55
.Surface Dives
Diving Safety
If you are diving to fulfill requirements 6 and 7, remember that Scouting
has specific guidelines for safe diving and elevated water entry. “Diving”
refers to any water entry in which the feet do not make first contact with
the water. “Elevated entry” refers to any water entry from a height more
than 18 inches above the water. BSA Safe Swim Defense guidelines do
not permit diving or swimming activity of any kind in water deeper than
12 feet. No elevated entry is permitted where the person must clear any
obstacle, including jumping or diving over land.
In water with less than 7 feet of unobstructed depth, diving is not per-
mitted and water entry must be feetfirst. A leaping entry is recommended
where water is at or above head level. A step-down or jump-down entry
from a sitting position is recommended for shallower water. Never attempt
to plunge headfirst below waves at a beach.
Diving is permitted in clear water at least 7 feet deep from a dock, pier,
or platform that is no more than 18 inches above the water surface.
However, if your state, city, or local community requires a water depth
greater than 7 feet, it is important to abide by that mandate.
Remember that it is the
weight of your legs above
you that pushes you down
into the water. It is important
to get them up into a vertical
position in all headfirst
surface dives.


56 SWIMMING
Surface Dives
Steps to Diving off a Dock or Pool Deck
Diving off a dock or pool deck is the best way to enter deep,
unobstructed water and be prepared to swim. Once you can
hold your breath for 5 seconds underwater you are ready to
learn to dive.
• Sitting Dive (pictured below). Sit on edge of deck as far
back as you can, keeping your legs down against the pool
side. Have someone place a pool noodle in the water about
4 feet in front of you. Put your head down with your chin
touching your chest. Tuck your chin down onto your chest.
Point your arms in front of your head with hands together.
Your arms should cover your ears. Your hands are held
together and will serve to guide you to the surface of the
water once you dive in. This is called the “Arrow Position.”
Take a breath and slowly roll forward, entering the water
hands first going under the pool noodle. Once you are past
the noodle point your hands up and you will easily come
to the surface ready to swim.
• Kneeling Dive (pictured next page, top). At the edge of
the deck curl your toes over the side, griping the deck.
Then kneel on one knee. Assume the Arrow Position you
used with the Sitting Dive. Take a breath and slowly roll
over your stationary kneel into the water, under the noodle.
Don’t push off the leg with your legs, just roll in.
2
3
1
Diving is permitted
only into clear,
unobstructed
water from heights
no greater than
40 inches.


Surface Dives
• Standing Dive.
Step 1 (pictured below). At the edge of the deck curl your
toes over the side, griping the deck. Move one leg back a
foot or two with the knee slightly bent. Get into the Arrow
Position. Take a breath and slowly roll over the stationary
leg hands first into the water going under the noodle.
Step 2 (pictured next page). Do the same as you did in
Step 1 but keep both feet at the edge of the pool with the
toes griping the side. Assume Arrow Position, bent down
and roll down into the water again going under the noodle
and pointing your hands up to return to the surface.
2
2
3
3
1
1


58 SWIMMING
2
1
It bears repeating:
Dive into water
that is at least 7
feet deep—even
deeper if state or
local regulations
mandate it.
Surface Dives.


SWIMMING 59
3
4
Once you are comfortable
with the standing dive you
can start using your legs to
propel you and out a bit fur-
ther into the pool for your
dive, always remembering
to be in the Arrow Position,
and enter the water hands
first then followed by your
head and body. You can
glide under the water as far
as you want and then point
your hands up to return to
the surface.
Diving into
shallow or
unclear
water is
dangerous and
foolish.
.Surface Dives


60 SWIMMING
Swimming for Fitness and Health.
Swimming for Fitness
and Health
Regular exercise may be the single most important thing a
person can do to live a long and healthy life. Studies of
people who live to great ages—into their 90s and
beyond—indicate that these people have at least one
thing in common: regular, consistent exercise. While
exercise has a wide variety of benefits, the most
remarkable are the prevention of heart disease and
the strengthening of bones.
Exercise and Health
The relationship between exercise and heart disease
has been investigated extensively. The results are
always the same: The physically active have less heart
disease. The impact of exercise on heart disease is, in
part, due to its beneficial effects on the other risk factors of
heart disease.
People who exercise regularly are much less likely to be
overweight because exercise burns calories. Exercise reduces
blood pressure, too. In fact, the combination of exercise and losing
weight often allows people with hypertension (high blood pres-
sure) to control it without taking medicines. This control may be
better than was possible with medicines. Research has shown that
active male joggers have lower total cholesterol than men of the
same age who don’t run. There is no substitute for exercise when
it comes to protecting your heart.
Without enough exercise, bones become demineralized. That
is, they lose their calcium and become brittle. If a person is put
to complete bed rest, this process starts almost immediately and
progresses rapidly. This is one reason why doctors recommend
that people who have had a major operation or a heart attack
resume activity as soon as possible.


SWIMMING 61
.Swimming for Fitness and Health
Exercise is an excellent cardiovascular conditioner and is
important to living better as well as longer. People who exer-
cise regularly feel and look younger than those who do not.
Improvements in muscle tone and circulation undoubtedly help
physically fit people feel more energetic and give them a feeling
of well-being. Moreover, research shows that healthy people are
more productive at work.
If the importance of exercise is so well-known and obvious,
then why do people often neglect to exercise and protect their
health? The main reason is choice! Remember your Scout train-
ing and Scout Oath—what will be your choice?
Making Exercise Part of Your Life
How, when, and where you choose to exercise will depend on
such things as where you live; what facilities and equipment are
available to you; and your health, physical abilities, and training.
But these things should determine only the type, place, and tim-
ing of your exercise, not your basic decision to exercise. Some
people may go rock climbing. Others may take daily walks. For
some people the choices are almost limitless. For others the
choices may be fewer, but everyone can choose to exercise and
can gain from doing it.
For those who are limited by choice or circumstances to
one form of exercise, a full-body exercise is strongly recom-
mended. In full-body exercise, all the muscles and joints are
moved and flexed. Examples of full-body exercise include brisk
walking, running, cycling, rowing, and swimming.
Swimming for Exercise
In many respects, swimming is superior to other forms of exer-
cise because it involves all the muscles and joints, is highly
aerobic, and has a very low injury rate. In addition, swimming
promotes coordination, and the buoyancy effect of water limits
stress to the joints.
The demineralization of bones has been documented
in astronauts returning from space, where lack of grav-
ity robs physical activity of its exercise value. Weak and
brittle bones—a result of a lack of exercise—are also
common in the aged.


62 SWIMMING
Swimming for Fitness and Health.
You can improve upper body strength by working on overarm
strokes, and focus on leg development with kick drills and swim
sprints using the flutter kick. It’s not surprising that swimming
is often prescribed and used as physical therapy for paralysis,
stroke, and injury victims. A regular swimming exercise program
will help you increase stamina, polish your swimming skills,
and develop an exercise program that you can keep using as you
grow older.
Swimming Is a Lifetime Skill
Learning to swim a variety of strokes will provide relaxation,
fun, and physical conditioning that will benefit you the rest of
your life. When the skills acquired through proper instruction
and practice are adapted to lifesaving techniques, they can save
the lives of swimmers themselves, as well as others. And, of
course, swimming at a competitive level is always challenging.
Best of all, learning this lifetime skill will leave you with a sense
of accomplishment and a fun way to relax with your friends.


SWIMMING 63
.Swimming Resources
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook; Deck of First
Aid; Emergency First Aid pocket guide;
Athletics, Emergency Preparedness, First
Aid, Lifesaving, Personal Fitness, Scuba
Diving, Sports, and Water Sports merit
badge pamphlets
Books
Barsky, Steven M. The Simple Guide to
Snorkeling Fun. Best Publishing
Company, 1999
Colwin, Cecil M. Breakthrough
Swimming. Human Kinetics, 2002.
Graver, Dennis K. Scuba Diving, 4th ed.
Human Kinetics, 2009.
Hines, Emmett W. Fitness Swimming,
2nd ed. Human Kinetics, 2008.
Laughlin, Terry. Extraordinary
Swimming for Every Body. Total
Immersion Swimming, 2006.
———. Total Immersion: The
Revolutionary Way to Swim Better,
Faster, and Easier. Touchstone, 2004.
Lenihan, Daniel J. Underwater Wonders
of the National Parks. Compass
America Guides, 1997.
Montgomery, Jim, and Mo Chambers.
Mastering Swimming. Human
Kinetics, 2008.
Orr, Dan, and Eric Douglas. Scuba
Diving Safety. Human Kinetics, 2007.
Salo, David, and Scott Riewald.
Complete Conditioning for Swimming.
Human Kinetics, 2008.
Thomas, David G. Swimming:
Steps to Success, 3rd ed. Human
Kinetics, 2012.
Organizations and
Websites
American Red Cross
Toll-free telephone: 800-733-2767
www.redcross.org
USA Swimming
www.usaswimming.org
YMCA of the USA
Telephone: 312-977-0031
www.ymca.org
Swimming Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


64 SWIMMING
Swimming Resources.
Acknowledgments
The Boy Scouts of America is grateful to
members of the BSA Aquatics Task Force
for their input on visuals and text. In
particular, we thank chair Cal Banning,
Jay Fox, and David Bell. These devoted
volunteers regularly help update the
Swimming merit badge pamphlet.
The Boy Scouts of America is grate-
ful to the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
All photos and illustrations are the
property of or are protected by the
Boy Scouts of America.
Jay Fox—pages 56-59
Roy Jansen—page 10 and 11
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 20, 28-29, 35, 37, 41, 43, 47,
50, and 53-54
Mary Oakes—pages 5 and 61
Randy Piland—pages 9, 15, 17, 38,
and 64
Luis Portillo—cover (swimming
illustrations), 31, 40, 45, and 48