TRAFFIC
SAFETY


TR AFFIC SAFETY
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Traffic-Safety or check Scoutbook
for the latest requirements.
35960
ISBN 978-0-8395-0124-4
©2025 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2025 Printing FPO


TRAFFIC SAFETY 3





TRAFFIC SAFETY 5
Contents
Traffic Safety: So Important It Could Save Your Life . . . . . . . . 7
The Perils of Distracted Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
The Perils of Impaired Driving . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Keeping Us Alive Through Road Design . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Engineering Safety Into Vehicles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Auto Maintenance and Safety Checkups . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Encounters with Law Enforcement While Driving . . . . . . . . 49
Sharing the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Navigating the Road . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 64
Traffic, Your Community, and You . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 79
Traffic Safety Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85





TRAFFIC SAFETY 7
.Traffic Safety: So Important It Could Save Your Life
Traffic Safety:
So Important It
Could Save Your Life
Staying safe in traffic wherever you live is getting more
difficult all the time, as more and more people take to the
road. This pamphlet will help you earn your Traffic Safety
merit badge and will give you some crucial tools to stay safer,
whether you are driving a car on a highway, riding a bike
across town, or jogging across a busy street.
Whether you live in a rural area or in the cities and
suburbs, traffic is a fact of life. You can be surrounded by
pristine wilderness and still be in the middle of a traffic jam.
Just ask the thousands of tourists who drive or bring their
vehicles to Alaska via the ferry system every summer, clogging
the state’s few major roads and slowing traffic to a crawl.


8 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Traffic Safety: So Important It Could Save Your Life.
Car collisions can happen in a split second. Even
experienced drivers might take their eyes off the road a
moment too long or go into a skid on an icy road. As a young
driver, you should be aware that teenagers in the United States
are far more likely to have a serious traffic accident in their
first year operating a motor vehicle than any other age group.
Why? It comes down to a combination of factors from
inexperience to the sense of invincibility and exhilaration
young people sometimes feel when they first get behind the
wheel of a 2-ton car. Combine alcohol or drugs with driving
and the results are often deadly. As a new driver it is critical
that you develop a combination of defensive, proactive skills
to help you stay safe on the roads. Scouts should understand
that driving is a privilege and should commit to being safe
and courteous drivers.
In 2017, motor vehicle accidents in the United States killed more
than 37,000 people. That is more than 1½ times the number of
people who fit into the average professional basketball arena.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 9
.Traffic Safety: So Important It Could Save Your Life
The Cost of Our Car Culture
Americans love their cars. We spend at least half as much time
stuck in traffic each year as we do going on an annual vacation.
Wherever you live, commutes to school or work are getting
longer and more snarled with traffic.
The problem is that we rely on our vehicles for our daily
needs. Trucks deliver food and other items to stores for us to
buy and use. Emergency vehicles such as fire trucks and
police cars respond to emergencies. Yet for all the advantages
of motorized transportation, there is a big price to pay. Motor
vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death among people
ages 1 through 34 and the leading cause of injury for all age
groups.
Vehicular collisions lead to tremendous social and
economic costs. When someone is killed in a car crash, a
whole range of people from family members to friends and
acquaintances feel the terrible loss. Economically, in addition
to lost wages, crash injuries contribute to expenses for medical
care, emergency services, nursing-home care, rehabilitation,
home modifications, insurance administration, and property
damage that amount to billions of dollars each year.
However, the biggest price society pays for transportation
accidents is personal. Lives can change in an instant. Just
imagine how parents feel when they get a phone call telling
them that their child has been injured or killed in a car
accident.





TRAFFIC SAFETY 11
.The Perils of Distracted Driving
The Perils of
Distracted Driving
Car crashes are the No. 1 killer of teens in the U.S., and driver
distraction is reported to be responsible for more than 58% of
teen crashes. Driver distraction includes visual tasks, such as
checking a text message or a navigation system; manual tasks,
such as reaching for a beverage or typing a text; and cognitive
tasks, such as daydreaming or talking on the phone. Cellphone
use is the second largest cause of distracted driving.
A teenager who texts while driving is 20 times more likely
to be involved in a motor-vehicle collision than a driver who is
not texting. Texting and driving is as dangerous as drinking
alcohol and driving (which will be discussed in the next
section).
Other distractions can cause collisions. Changing music,
turning to talk to someone, or looking at something on the side
of the road can cause a driver to lose focus on safe driving. The
driver’s most important job is to safely drive the car, and a
driver should not let anything—a phone call, text, or searching
for a favorite song on the radio—interfere with safe driving.
Experts have determined how far a car travels after the
driver hits the brakes. It depends on how fast the car is
traveling, but it also depends on how quickly the driver reacts
before braking. As a rule, a car going 30 miles per hour (mph)
will travel 76 feet before stopping; a car going 50 mph will
travel 174 feet before stopping; and a car going 70 mph will
travel 311 feet before stopping. Clearly, the speed of the car
greatly increases the distance to stop.
But in many collisions, the distracted driver fails to brake
at all or brakes far too late. When a driver looks away for only
five seconds, they have traveled 220 feet at 30 mph while not
watching the road; 366 feet (a length greater than that of a
If your phone
rings or you
desperately need
to make a call,
safely pull of the
road before
answering or
calling.


12 TRAFFIC SAFETY
The Perils of Distracted Driving.
football field) at 50 mph without looking up; and 513 feet at 70
mph before they notice and react to anything on the road.
When you add the braking distance discussed above, a collision
becomes nearly impossible to avoid.
A trustworthy Scout knows that those who make it
possible for them to drive are trusting the Scout to be alert
while driving and to refrain from any distractions, so that the
Scout, the passengers, and the public are protected from
devastating traffic collisions.
See more details on safe driving and gauging braking
distances in the chapter “Navigating the Road” that begins on
page 64.
Distracted Driving—What Is That?
Distracted driving is any activity that could divert a person’s attention
away from the primary task of driving. All distractions threaten the safety
of the driver, passengers, and bystanders. Distractions include:
• Texting—Because text messaging requires visual, manual, and
cognitive attention from the driver, it is by far the most alarming
distraction.
• Using a cell phone or smartphone
• Eating and drinking
• Talking to passengers
• Grooming
• Reading, including maps
• Using a navigation system
• Watching a video
• Adjusting the radio or any electronic device
This lifesaving information comes from the U.S. Department
of Transportation.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 13
.The Perils of Distracted Driving
23X
What’s 23X, you ask? According to
the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, those who text while
driving are 23 times more likely to
crash than nontexters. Join Scouting
America and AT&T in quashing this
dangerous and often fatal practice
through “Texting & Driving: It Can Wait.”
To take the pledge never to text and drive and to learn more about this
lifesaving initiative, visit itcanwait.com.





TRAFFIC SAFETY 15
.The Perils of Impaired Driving
The Perils of
Impaired Driving
Motor vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death in the
United States for young people, and an alarming number of
these crashes are related to alcohol or drug abuse. Alcohol-
impaired driving is highest among persons 21 to 24 years old,
and the percentage of fatal crashes that are alcohol-related is
highest for this age group.
However, even for the youngest drivers, alcohol-related
crashes are a serious problem. Not only are drivers under age
21 more likely than older drivers to be involved in fatal crashes,
but their added risk for fatal crash involvement increases more
sharply at all levels of alcohol use.
Alcohol and drugs are perhaps the most publicized causes
of impaired driving, but they are not the only causes. Each year
a considerable number of serious crashes occur as a result of
drivers who are impaired by fatigue and drowsiness.
Another serious factor in accidents is drivers using their
cell phones while driving, which diverts their attention from the
road. Texting while driving is extremely dangerous and is illegal
in many states.
To impair means
to weaken
or damage.


16 TRAFFIC SAFETY
The Perils of Impaired Driving.
Alcohol and Driving
Alcohol is a depressant. It slows down the functioning of the
brain and the nervous system. The physical and mental skills
needed to operate a vehicle safely, along with clear vision, are
impaired when a person drinks and then gets behind the wheel.
Alcohol impairs the following skills and abilities:
• Multitasking—Research suggests that the most serious effect
of alcohol on a driver is that it reduces the driver’s ability to
handle several tasks at one time.
• Reaction time—Alcohol slows the driver’s ability to react to
sudden events on the road.
• Tracking—Drivers under the influence of alcohol have trouble
continuously observing the position of the vehicle with respect
to the road and keeping the vehicle in the correct location.
• Comprehension—Alcohol diminishes the driver’s ability to
perceive hazards on the road.
• Attention span—Alcohol reduces the driver’s alertness over
an extended period of time.
• Coordination—A drunken driver cannot handle tasks that
require high levels of precise movement.
Six Scout-age
youths lose
their lives in
alcohol-related
crashes every
day. More than
one-third of
all traffic
fatalities are
alcohol-related.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 17
.The Perils of Impaired Driving
Blood Alcohol Concentration
Blood alcohol concentration (BAC) is the amount of alcohol in the
bloodstream. It is measured by the weight of the alcohol in relation
to the blood. BAC can be measured by breath, blood, or urine tests
within 30 to 70 minutes after someone has had a drink.
It is more accurate to refer to alcohol-
impaired driving rather than intoxicated
(drunken) driving because a person does
not have to be legally intoxicated to be
impaired. In all 50 states, the legal standard
for intoxication is a BAC of 0.08. However,
studies have shown that impairments first
appear at BACs as low as 0.02. Driving
skills, especially judgment, are impaired
in most people long before they show
obvious signs of drunkenness.
Factors that affect BAC include the following:
• Amount of alcohol consumed. The more a person drinks, the higher the
BAC level will be.
• Body weight. Heavier people are not as quickly affected by alcohol as
lighter people.
• Food in the stomach. When the stomach has food in it, the bloodstream
absorbs alcohol more slowly.
• Gender. Women reach higher BACs faster than men. Therefore, if a man
and woman, with all other factors being equal, are both drinking the
same amount of alcohol, the woman will have a higher BAC level.
• Type of alcohol consumed. The higher the alcohol content of a drink,
the more quickly it is absorbed. Distilled spirits (whisky, vodka, rum,
gin) have the highest concentration of alcohol, followed by wine and
then beer.
• Speed at which a person drinks. The liver can process and eliminate
only about one drink per hour (one drink = 1.5 ounces of 80-proof
distilled spirits; 5 ounces of wine; or 12 ounces of beer). If a person
drinks more quickly than this rate, the excess alcohol will remain in
the bloodstream and elevate the person’s BAC.


18 TRAFFIC SAFETY
The Perils of Impaired Driving.
Consequences of DUI/DWI
The laws regarding driving under the influence (DUI) or driving
while intoxicated (DWI) in the United States are very rigid.
It is illegal in all 50 states to drive with a BAC at or above
0.08 percent. In a majority of states, drivers who are found
to have a BAC of 0.08 or higher will have their licenses
revoked or suspended under a procedure called administrative
license suspension. Drivers who refuse a BAC test will also
have their licenses suspended or revoked. These administrative
suspension laws, which go into effect right after an arrest,
have proved to be more effective than laws that did not
suspend or revoke a license until after a person was convicted
of alcohol-impaired driving.
Most states have open-container laws that prohibit the
driver or other occupants of a vehicle from having open
containers of alcohol in the passenger compartment of
the vehicle. Penalties for those convicted of violating
open-container laws vary from state to state but include
fines and community service. Find out what the open-
container law is in your state.
The consequences of DUI/DWI vary but can include some
or all of the following: fines, license suspension, license
revocation, mandatory alcohol-awareness classes, community
service, and jail time. Repeat offenders will likely serve time in
jail, be required to participate in an alcohol-abuse program, and
also may need to enroll in an Alcoholics Anonymous program.
Other circumstances can make the punishment harsher.
Drivers under the influence who have a child in the car with
them, who are speeding, who refuse to take a BAC test, who
have prior DUI/DWI convictions, or who cause an accident or
injury will receive stiffer penalties. In most states, if a drunken
driver injures someone, it is considered a felony. If the person
dies, the driver can be charged with manslaughter or murder.


.The Perils of Impaired Driving
A Tremendous Loss
By Joe, age 16
Last September, a friend, teammate, and fellow Scout in my troop was
in a horrible car accident. His name was Tim Murphy. He was a senior
at my school and a year older than me. He was captain of our school’s
varsity soccer team, the first-chair French horn player in the band, and
a Life Scout working hard on Eagle Scout requirements.
One night after a senior dance, Tim was driving home very late on
Interstate 55, headed south. Tim’s car was hit head-on by a northbound
car. Both cars were totaled, and Tim was stuck inside. We later learned
that Tim died instantly, and the other driver, who had been drinking, also
died. People living close to the scene of the accident heard the noise and
came to see what happened. A man who witnessed the accident had
trouble sleeping because he kept thinking about the two people who
had died in the crash.
Tim was a great person. His soccer number, 17, is retired now. The
band dedicated a concert to him. Photos of him are posted all over
school. I sometimes wonder why the other driver had been drinking
and driving, and I wonder if anyone had tried to stop him from getting
behind the wheel.
We all miss Tim, and we wish he were still with us today.


20 TRAFFIC SAFETY
The Perils of Impaired Driving.
A conviction for DUI/DWI for driving under the influence
of alcohol or drugs can cost a person as much as $15,000 as
a result of attorney’s fees, increased insurance rates, towing
fines, court costs, and bonding fees. A person’s license may
be suspended or revoked. A conviction can prevent a person
from getting a job or a promotion, and it can even get the
person fired.
Zero-Tolerance Laws
Young drivers are particularly susceptible to impairment by
alcohol. During a typical weekend, one teenager dies every
hour in a car crash. Nearly 50 percent of those crashes involve
alcohol. Safety advocates have argued that teens should not
drive if they have had any amount of alcohol, which has led to
support for zero-tolerance laws. All 50 states have enacted zero-
tolerance laws for drivers under age 21. These laws set the BAC
limit of 0.00 (no detectable
level) to 0.02 percent as the
legal limit. Underage drivers
found to be under the
influence may be fined
and/or have their license
suspended. In addition, they
may be required to attend
alcohol-education classes and
perform community service.
Drugs and Driving
Using marijuana also impairs many of the skills needed for
driving a car. Effects may include difficulty in judging distances
and delayed reactions to sights and sounds that drivers
absolutely need to notice, much like the effects of drinking
alcohol. When users combine marijuana and alcohol, the
hazards of driving become even more serious. Driving while
under the influence of drugs is more common among drivers
ages 16 to 20 than any other age group.
Many insurance
companies
automatically
cancel their
coverage of a
driver convicted
on a DUI/DWI
violation.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 21
.The Perils of Impaired Driving
A Deadly Mix
Research shows that
• Marijuana is harmful to the brain, heart, lungs, and
immune system. It limits learning, memory,
perception, judgment, and complex motor skills such
as those needed to drive a vehicle.
• People under the influence of cocaine become easily
confused and lose the ability to think clearly for any
length of time.
• Inhalants can cause damage to the heart, kidneys,
liver, brain, and other organs.
Many people believe that only alcohol, marijuana, and
other “hard” drugs impair their abilities. Prescription
drugs and over-the-counter medicines such as
antihistamines for colds and allergies can cause
drowsiness and other side effects, too. Every year some
crashes are caused by drivers who are not alert
because of medicine they took. The danger is even
greater for a person who is taking more than one
medication. The interaction of two or more medicines
may impair driving
in ways that catch
the driver by
surprise. Warnings
on prescription
bottles—such as
those advising
drivers to stay off
the road when on
the medication—
should be taken
seriously.


22 TRAFFIC SAFETY
The Perils of Impaired Driving.
Your Responsibilities as a Passenger
Even when you are a passenger, you should pay attention to the
condition of the person who is driving the vehicle. You might
think that young victims of drunken drivers are usually in a car
that is hit by the intoxicated driver or that they were hit while
walking or riding their bikes; however, a study of children who
died in alcohol-related crashes revealed that nearly two-thirds of
those children were riding with the drunken driver. Two-thirds
of drunken drivers studied were parents or adult caregivers,
while most of the others were young drivers.*
Even if you experience peer pressure to get in a car with
a group of friends who have been drinking or you are at a
family event where a parent has been drinking, your life and
the lives of others may depend on your having the judgment
and the courage to say, “I’m not riding with you because
you’ve been drinking.”
Asleep at the Wheel
Most people know that drinking and driving is dangerous, but
they may not realize that driving while drowsy can be just as
fatal as driving while drunk. Fatigue or lack of sleep can cause
a driver to fall asleep at the wheel or to not pay attention while
driving. Fatigue slows reaction time, dulls awareness, impairs
judgment, and consequently increases the risk of crashes.
Research into sleepiness focuses on the human biological
clock. Everybody has a biological clock that plays a role in
controlling hunger, energy levels, and body temperature. Most
people’s biological clocks make them especially likely to feel sleepy
at three specific times during the day. One is the afternoon lull,
from 2 p.m. to 5 p.m. The others are early in the morning and late
at night, which is by far the most dangerous time for drivers.
When you drive, pay careful attention to the behavior
of other drivers near your vehicle. If you see them weaving,
drifting into another lane inexplicably, heading for a ditch,
or exhibiting any other unusual behavior, actively avoid
them—slow down and stay in back of them. If you yourself
start feeling drowsy while driving, get off the road immediately.
Get out and take a brisk walk to wake yourself up, or have
someone who is well-rested take the wheel.
*Quinlan, Kyran, M.D., et al., “Characteristics of Child Passenger Deaths and
Injuries Involving Drinking Drivers,” Journal of the American Medical Association
(May 3, 2000).
Did you know
that 58 percent
of commercial
vehicle accidents
are estimated
to be related
to fatigue?


TRAFFIC SAFETY 23
.The Perils of Impaired Driving
The Risk Zone
Driving while fatigued is a transportation concern being
addressed by Scouting America. Scouting America hopes to
raise awareness of the dangers of drowsy driving with the help
of the Risk Zone campaign. The following driver’s pledge is an
important piece of the campaign and emphasizes that planning
is the best defense against killer fatigue.
DRIVER’S
PLEDGE• I will not drive when I feel fatigued. I realize
that when I am fatigued, I process information
more slowly and less accurately and this impairs
my ability to react in time to avoid accidents.
• I will arrange my schedule so that for several
days before a Scout “driving trip,” I will get a
good night’s sleep every night to avoid the
cumulative effects of not getting enough sleep.
• I will make trip preparations far enough in
advance so that last-minute preparations don’t
interfere with my rest.
• I will make travel plans and drive only during
the part of the day when I know I will
be alert.
• I will be smart about engaging
in physical activities during
Scouting outings and will
make sure that I will be ready
to drive alertly.
DO ALL THAT YOU
CAN TO KEEP
SCOUTS SAFE.





TRAFFIC SAFETY 25
.Keeping Us Alive Through Road Design
Keeping Us Alive
Through Road Design
The need for better and safer roads is a constant challenge for
engineers. In this section you will learn to look at streets and
roads through the eyes of a highway engineer. Highway engineers
design roads using scientific principles and standards that help
keep drivers safer and cyclists and pedestrians safe. A highway
engineer has much responsibility and many factors to consider
when designing a road.
The Role of the Federal Highway
Administration
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) is a federal agency
that helps develop and improve the nation’s transportation
system. Among the chief responsibilities of the FHWA is the
improvement of roadway safety. The FHWA seeks to educate
the public about roadway safety and to find ways to reduce the
number of pedestrian fatalities, intersection fatalities, and road
departure fatalities—deaths that occur when a vehicle leaves its
designated lane.
According to the FHWA, roadway safety is a
serious, national public health issue. In 2012,
2.36 million injuries and 33,561 fatalities occurred
on our nation’s roads—that’s an average of
98 deaths a day.


26 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Roadway Safety Features
Rumble strips, retroreflective signs and markings, and special
roadway hardware are some of the safety features highway
engineers incorporate in their roadway designs. Rumble strips
are small indentations or raised strips on the pavement that,
when driven over, make noise. Rumble strips alert drivers when
they are veering off the road or heading into a different lane.
Retroreflective signs and pavement markings help nighttime
drivers. Made from a material that bounces light from
headlights back to drivers’ eyes, such signs and markings are
quite easy to see at night. Forgiving roadside hardware (such as
guardrails and breakaway poles) skid-resistant pavement, and
all-weather pavement markings also help prevent or minimize
the severity of accidents.
About 40 percent of all crashes occur at intersections. To
make intersections safer for drivers, pedestrians, and
bicyclists, traffic engineers have made improvements to the
timing mechanisms of traffic signals. They also have improved
signage, added exclusive turn lanes, and built roundabouts—
circular intersections that eliminate certain intersection
conflicts such as left turns.
To improve safety specifically for pedestrians, traffic
engineers make improvements to lighting to enhance visibility
and construct islands on medians that give pedestrians a safe
place to stop when crossing a multilane street or road. For blind
and low-vision pedestrians, traffic engineers add special audible
signals that help them know when it is safe to cross a street
and truncated domes that help them detect the boundary
between the sidewalk and the street.
Rumble Strips
Rumble strips help keep roads safe because they increase driver attention.
The textured patterns of rumble strips will not damage a vehicle and can
safely be driven over at the speed limit. They may be used in the following
roadway locations:
• Across a road when there is a tollbooth ahead or when there is an
unexpected stop sign or traffic signal after a long stretch of uninter-
rupted roadway
• Along the shoulder of rural highways, especially interstates, to alert
drowsy drivers that they have begun to drift onto the shoulder
• In the center of a two-lane road to warn of the danger of passing
Roundabout sign


TRAFFIC SAFETY 27
Speed
When a new road is built or an old one rebuilt, one important
decision that guides the design is what the speed limit will be.
Common sense dictates that if a driver can just barely negotiate
a curve safely while driving 30 miles per hour, the curve will be
too sharp for an interstate highway where the speed limit is
65 to 75 miles per hour. For example, if engineers know that
the project is for a rural two-lane highway with a speed limit
of 55 miles per hour, they can research the correct standards
to find out how they should design lane and shoulder widths,
curves, grades, passing zones, and intersections. When the
road is built, it will be safe to drive at 55 miles per hour.
Uniformity
Imagine you and your family are driving from your home in
Pennsylvania to the Grand Canyon in Arizona. When you get
to Indiana, the stop signs are blue circles instead of red
octagons. In Colorado, all the road signs look like pine trees,
and you cannot see them well at night. To keep this traffic-
safety nightmare from happening, the FHWA makes sure every
state adheres to its Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices,
which tells traffic engineers which signs are needed, what
they must look like, and where they must be installed. You
will learn more about signs, signals, and pavement markings
in the “Navigating the Road” section of this pamphlet.
Accommodating All Road Users
Traffic engineers must be mindful of the needs of all the people who
will use the roads. With an increasing number of older drivers in our
society, engineers must pay special attention to making signs more
visible and intersections and interchanges less confusing. An engineer
also must consider the needs of younger drivers. A teenage driver, for
example, may lack the experience to anticipate hidden hazards that can
cause crashes. Nor can the engineers fail to address the needs of people
with disabilities. Someone who walks with a cane, for example, will take
longer to cross the street than other pedestrians and, thus, traffic signal
timings will need to be long enough to allow them to safely get across
an intersection. Curbs must have ramps so people in wheelchairs can
safely cross the street.
.


28 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Keeping Us Alive Through Road Design.
Intersection, Lane, and Visibility Safety Issues
Intersections are the most dangerous locations in urban areas.
Based on volume of traffic and other factors, a traffic engineer
needs to decide if a traffic signal is necessary and whether there
ought to be separate left-turn or right-turn lanes. Parking must
be prohibited near intersections so that drivers can clearly
see other cars and pedestrians. Room for a bus stop may be
needed. If there is a traffic signal, crosswalks and “Walk/Don’t
Walk” signals must be included in the design.
Lane safety is also important to road engineers. They need
to figure out how many lanes are needed to prevent congestion
and move traffic along smoothly. They also need to determine
how wide the lane should be to permit safe travel at the speed
limit. On a quiet residential street, lanes may need to be only
10 feet wide, while a high-speed freeway requires 12-foot lanes.
On high-speed, high-volume highways, it is important to
separate lanes of opposing directions of traffic to prevent head-on
crashes. Engineers prefer a wide grass median between lanes so
oncoming cars have room to stop or recover if they leave the left
side of the roadway. Also important are shoulders on suburban
or rural roads where drivers can safely stop in case of an
emergency. To prevent accidents that could happen as vehicles
enter and exit interchanges on expressways and freeways, traffic
engineers include acceleration and deceleration lanes.
Visibility is important in all road design. A driver needs to
be able to see hazards ahead to have time to make a decision
to stop if necessary. It is impossible to see over the crest of a
hill or around a curve. Engineers try to design roads so hazards
such as intersections and railroad crossings are not hidden from
view. Signs and pavement markings must be visible not just in
bright daylight but in dark nighttime conditions as well as in
poor weather. Proper street lighting is important, especially in
urban areas where pedestrians are present.
At rural intersections, sight distance is an important
part of the design. Drivers on a side road must be able
to see far enough to the right and to the left so that
they can safely pull onto a highway where traffic may
be traveling at 55 miles per hour or faster.
Cities across
the country
have added
high-occupancy
vehicle (HOV)
lanes to
help alleviate
congestion during
peak traffic times.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 29
.Keeping Us Alive Through Road Design
Terrain is another major consideration in an engineer’s
design of a new roadway. Sharp curves and steep hills can
cause drivers to lose control and run off the road. Engineering
gentle curves and grades is the desirable solution. Whenever
possible, the road is designed so that it can be driven safely at
the posted speed limit. Sometimes, however, the terrain makes
it impossible to meet the design speed standard for curves or
grades, and in that case, warning signs are posted.
Roadside Hazards
Keeping motorists alive through good road design also means
paying attention to the roadside. In more than one-third of all
highway fatalities, the side of the road is a factor. Various
factors can cause a vehicle to leave the roadway, including
distractions, vehicle malfunctions, traffic situations, and poor
road conditions. Whatever the reason, once a vehicle leaves
the roadway, the results are often catastrophic. Many roads
are lined with “booby traps”—trees, signs, posts, guardrails,
or other structures that can mean death for a motorist.
When designing a road, engineers try to leave a clear zone
on the side of it, but it is not always possible to construct such
forgiving roadside areas along every highway. Engineers strive
to provide sides of the road that are free of hazards with enough
room for the driver to regain control of the vehicle and come to
a safe stop whenever possible.
Don’t Hang Out in the No-Zone
No-zones are danger areas around trucks where crashes are more likely
to occur. Some of those no-zones are actual blind spots where your car
“disappears” from the view of the truck or bus driver (or where another
vehicle on the road “disappears” from your own view). Automobiles also
have blind spots.
NO-ZONE
NO-ZONE
NO-ZONE


When it is not possible to create an adequate clear zone,
roadside objects such as light poles and signposts can be built
to yield or break away, which can greatly increase a motorist’s
chance of survival without serious injury. The ends of bridges
and concrete median barriers can be protected by special
energy-absorbing crash cushions. In some instances the best
method is to eliminate the hazard. Each roadside object is
evaluated and removed if it is not needed.
Road Conditions
Road conditions play a major role in the safe operation of
vehicles. Good pavement conditions are important for traction
and for stopping quickly. When highway surfaces are well-
maintained, drivers have a better chance of staying on the road.
Proper maintenance means that drivers won’t have to swerve to
avoid potholes or lose control if their wheel hits a rut in the
road or strays onto a shoulder drop-off.
VEHICLE
IMPACT BASE RELEASES AND
HINGE ACTIVATES
VEHICLE PASSES
UNDERNEATH SIGN
Breakaway sign support


TRAFFIC SAFETY 31
.Keeping Us Alive Through Road Design
Weather plays a critical role in quickly changing road
conditions and contributes to many crashes. Rain, even a
drizzle, can cause a vehicle’s tires to lose contact with
the road. When there is too much water on the road,
the vehicle’s tires can start skimming on the surface of
the water instead of gripping the road—a phenomenon
known as hydroplaning. It can cause loss of control of
the vehicle and a possible crash. To help eliminate
this hazard, engineers design roads so that rainwater
drains quickly to the edges and is carried away by storm
drains or ditches. The surface of the pavement can be
constructed with roughness or grooves to help tires
maintain better traction and avoid skids.
In regions of the country where snow is common,
design engineers try to help make winter driving safer. For
example, an area beside the street or road can be designed for
snow storage. When the snowplows come through, they can
clear the road all the way to the curb or the edge of the
shoulder. In addition, some cities are experimenting with a
special type of concrete that slowly releases ice-melting
chemicals as vehicles drive over a bridge in freezing
temperatures, thus helping keep the bridge safe for travel.
Another fairly recent innovation is electronic signs that post
warnings about hazardous conditions such as fog, high winds,
or severe snow and ice storms. Sometimes these signs are
connected to sensors so that they automatically turn on if
visibility or conditions drop below an acceptable limit.
You have probably seen signs at
bridges reading “Bridge Freezes
Before Pavement.” Because
the undersides of bridges
are exposed to cold air,
the bridge deck will
freeze first and become
icy and slick.


32 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Keeping Us Alive Through Road Design.
Highway Work Zones
At construction sites, design engineers must ensure that the
work zone is safe for both the workers and the travelers. Every
road construction job includes a maintenance and protection
of traffic plan. The engineer must decide how to safely handle
traffic along the construction route, which requires planning
the layout of warning signs, barricades, drums, or cones.
Sometimes all traffic is detoured around the site or the
construction is staged to keep one or more lanes open at all
times. Engineers impose a reduced speed limit, because drivers
sometimes become confused even in a well-designed work
zone. At slower speeds, drivers have more time to make good
decisions.
Every year hundreds of road-construction workers are
killed or injured on the job by inattentive drivers who
crash through work zones. Always remember to slow
down and pay careful attention to safety in traffic
construction zones.
Road construction
is a daily
inconvenience
for most drivers,
but it is important
to maintain and
upgrade our
roads and bridges.
Repairing them
before they
deteriorate too
much helps
prevent accidents
and saves
taxpayers’ money.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 33
.Keeping Us Alive Through Road Design





TRAFFIC SAFETY 35
.Engineering Safety Into Vehicles
Engineering Safety
Into Vehicles
Vehicle accidents cause damage, injuries, and deaths because
the crashes impose force on people and property beyond their
breaking points. By managing the force—the sudden transfer of
energy in a crash—and by controlling the time and the areas it
affects, damage and injuries can be reduced. A person can
withstand a great deal of force when properly “packaged” for it.
For more than 50 years, manufacturers have been engineer-
ing automobiles with increasingly sophisticated safety features.
Guiding manufacturers to produce safe vehicles is one of the
responsibilities of the Department of Transportation’s National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA). The NHTSA
works to reduce deaths, injuries, and economic losses from
traffic accidents. It establishes and enforces safety performance
standards. It also develops programs to prevent crashes and
reduce losses before a crash happens, to protect people and
property in a crash, and to help reduce the amount of damage
after crashes occur.
One way the NHTSA accomplishes its goal of providing
safety information is by putting cars and trucks through
crash-testing procedures using crash-test dummies. The NHTSA
tests include running vehicles head-on into a fixed barrier at
35 miles per hour. Afterward, researchers evaluate the impact
on the dummies’ heads, chests, and legs and the reliability of
occupant restraint systems such as seat belts and air bags. Due
in large part to this testing, today’s passenger vehicles are far
more crashworthy than cars and trucks used to be.
All cars must
meet the federal
Department of
Transportation’s
safety standards for
crashworthiness.
Larger, heavier cars tend to be safer in a collision than
smaller vehicles. If a smaller car collides with a heavier,
larger vehicle, the smaller car and its occupants will
suffer much more damage.


36 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Engineering Safety Into Vehicles.
Occupant Restraint Systems
Safety belts are the most effective device for preventing serious
injuries and reducing fatalities in motor vehicle crashes. Studies
have shown that people who wear seat belts reduce their risk
of serious injury by 50 percent and reduce the risk of fatal
injury by 45 percent. Safety belts also keep passengers properly
positioned to fully benefit from the protection provided by air
bags. Research has shown that the chances of being killed are
five times greater when the occupant is thrown from a vehicle.
Properly worn safety belts help prevent passengers from being
ejected. Crash victims who wear safety belts are more likely
to be unhurt, alert, and able to escape quickly. Always wear
a safety belt and make sure that all other passengers are
properly restrained.
The NHTSA says that growing up safe is a four-step process. As children
grow, the way they are restrained in a vehicle should grow with them.
Rear-facing infant seats (back seat).
From birth to at least 1 year old
and at least 20 pounds.
Forward-facing toddler seats
(back seat). From age 1 and
20 pounds to about age 4 and
40 pounds.
Safety belts (back seat).
From when a child reaches
age 8 or is taller than
4 feet, 9 inches.
Booster seats (back seat).
From about age 4 to at least
age 8, unless the child is at
least 4 feet, 9 inches tall.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 37
.Engineering Safety Into Vehicles
Proper Use of Safety Belts
Fasten the seat belt low on the hips and as snugly as possible.
This ensures that crash forces will be spread out by the safety
belt at the strong hipbone structure rather than across the soft
abdominal area, which can easily be injured. The shoulder belt
should go over the shoulder and across the chest. Check the
manufacturer’s instructions to properly adjust safety belts in
your vehicle. Only one person should use each safety belt at
a time. An adult cannot safely hold and protect a child in a
vehicle. A crash impact would pull a child or infant from an
adult’s arms.
Transporting Young
Children Safely
Each year, thousands of children are injured or killed
in traffic accidents. The proper use of child safety
seats, booster seats, and seat belts can help keep
infants, toddlers, and small children safe in a crash.
All children 12 years old and under should always
ride properly restrained in the backseat. Children who
sit in the front passenger seat, even if they are properly
secured in a safety seat, risk injury or death should the
vehicle be in a collision that causes the air bag to deploy.
Infants who weigh less than 20 pounds and are under 1 year of
age should always ride in a rear-facing child-safety seat. Once a child is
more than 1 year old and weighs at least 20 pounds, he or she can use
a forward-facing safety seat. There are many different brands of safety
seats on the market, so always read the manufacturers’ installation
instructions very carefully to be certain that the seat is properly
installed and will properly protect the child. Children should continue
to ride in safety seats until they weigh at least 40 pounds.
Children who weigh 40 to 80
pounds should use a booster seat,
which will raise the child up high
enough so that the lap and shoulder
belts in the backseat will fit correctly.
Because seat belts are designed to fit
adults, a child should continue to use
a booster seat until he or she is at
least 4 feet 9 inches tall.
When transporting
pets, always
confine them to a
carrier. This will
prevent them
from distracting
or interfering with
the driver and
causing an
accident. It also
will keep them
safer in the event
of a collision.
Booster seat


38 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Engineering Safety Into Vehicles.
Air Bags
Side and front air bags have been proven to be effective safety
devices. An air bag is a flexible membrane or envelope. When a
head-on or nearly head-on collision occurs, air bags inflate
rapidly with air or another gas to cushion the vehicle’s
passengers. The bag has small vent holes that allow the
propellant gas to be (relatively) slowly expelled from the bag as
the occupant pushes against it.
Air bags should always be used with a safety belt. Air
bags supplement the safety belt by reducing the chance that
the occupant’s head and upper body will strike some part of
the vehicle’s interior. They also help reduce the risk of serious
injury by distributing crash forces more evenly across the
occupant’s body.
In 1984, the federal government required all newly
manufactured cars to have driver’s side air bags by 1989.
Initially, most vehicles featured a single air bag, mounted in the
steering wheel to protect the driver of the car (who is most at
risk for injury). During the 1990s, air bags for front-seat
passengers and separate side-impact air bags, placed between
the door and occupants, became common. In 1991, Congress
mandated that all new passenger vehicles be equipped with
driver and passenger air bags by 1998.
Statistics show that passengers in cars equipped with air bags
have approximately 30 percent less chance of dying in an accident
than in comparable cars without air bags. Despite this, air bags
have caused some controversy, as the initial expansion of the bag
is a violent event. Air bags deploy and inflate in about 1
⁄20th of a
second and have on rare occasions caused serious and sometimes
fatal injuries. For example, if unrestrained occupants slide forward
in their seats during braking prior to the crash, they may come
into direct contact with the air bag module when it deploys.
Even properly restrained drivers who sit very close
to the steering wheel can be injured or killed in an airbag
deployment. Although manufacturers are always working on
ways to improve the effectiveness and lessen the risks of air
bags, the NHTSA recommends that drivers allow at least 10
inches of space between the center of their sternum and the
center of the steering wheel.
Children should
never ride in the
back of a pickup
truck, even if the
back is covered.
Once deployed,
the air bag must
be replaced by an
authorized service
department.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 39
.Engineering Safety Into Vehicles
Other Vehicle Safety Features
Other protective devices typically found in vehicles include a
steering column that absorbs the energy of a driver thrown
against it rather than remaining rigid. Side-guard beams provide
side-impact protection. Headrests protect against whiplash
by helping keep the head and neck erect during an impact.
Penetration-resistant windshields help keep objects from
breaking through glass. Antilaceration glass breaks into
fragments without forming sharp edges, helping to reduce cuts.
Still more vehicle safety features include recessed door
handles, nonprojecting knobs on the dash panel, breakaway
rearview mirrors, padded dashboards, padding on the back of
front seats (for backseat passengers), crushable front ends of
cars that absorb crash energy, and passenger compartments
that resist being crushed. Some vehicles have inflatable rollover
curtains that protect occupants against the series of impacts
that happen during a rollover.
What to Look for When Buying a Car
Today’s cars offer many safety features either included as
standard equipment or available as additional options. Many
insurance companies offer discounts if these features are in
your car. Here are some important safety features to look for
in a vehicle.
Air bags are a risk to children seated in the front seat.
The force of the air bag deploying can injure or kill
a child.


40 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Engineering Safety Into Vehicles.
Traction and Stability Control. Traction control systems help
keep a vehicle’s tires from losing contact with the road during
acceleration. Stability control systems help prevent a vehicle
from skidding sideways. Both are very helpful for keeping a
vehicle on course in emergencies or in foul weather.
Antilock Brakes. When used properly, antilock brakes allow
a driver to stop straighter and faster, especially on slick or
wet surfaces.
Safety Belt Tensioners. Automatic safety belt tensioners
instantly make the belt snug in a crash to better protect
occupants from being thrown from the car.
Head Restraints. Head restraints are designed to prevent front-
seat occupants’ heads from being snapped back if a vehicle is
rear-ended. Some new vehicles also have head restraints for
backseat passengers.
Advanced Front Air Bags. Vehicles that are equipped with
advanced front air bags adjust their inflation force to a
passenger’s weight and the crash conditions.
Side-Impact Air Bags. Side-impact air bags give additional
protection to the head and torso during a crash.
If your family
is considering
buying a sports
utility vehicle
(SUV), you should
know that smaller
SUVs are more
likely to roll
over than cars.
Also, these
vehicles do not
have to comply
with the same
federal safety
standards as cars.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 41
.Engineering Safety Into Vehicles


42 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Auto Maintenance
and Safety Checkups
A motor vehicle is a complex machine that requires frequent
checkups and adjustments to continue to operate safely. Miles
of driving gradually wear down all the parts of a vehicle. As
parts wear out, unsafe operating conditions develop. Regular
vehicle checkups and repairs will help prevent the car’s parts
from failing because of normal wear and tear. The owner’s
manual that comes with a vehicle provides valuable
information about the maintenance schedule and the proper
use of the vehicle’s equipment.
You can make the following simple safety-related checks.
Have your parent or counselor observe and supervise your work
as you go through the list. These simple checks, along with
proper preventive maintenance, will help ensure that the
vehicle is in safe operating condition.
Safety Belts
• Check the belts, buckles, and belt retractors periodically,
and make sure that the belts are not twisted or excessively
frayed. Check the mounts that hold lap and shoulder belts to
the floor and the roof. Inspect them for damage and looseness,
and replace any damaged equipment.
• If the belts in the vehicle were worn during a crash, have
them inspected and replaced if necessary. The crash may
have weakened them and reduced their ability to protect
passengers during another crash.
• When belts become dirty, use only mild soap and lukewarm
water to clean them.
• Never bleach or dye a belt. This can reduce the belt’s
overall strength.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 43
Lights
Properly functioning lights help make a
vehicle visible to others at night or during
poor weather conditions. They also allow
the driver to see other vehicles, pedestrians,
and hazards in or near the roadway. You can
make the following simple checks on the
front lights. First be sure the engine is off, the
vehicle is in park, and the parking brake is on. Make sure an
adult is present, because you will be using the ignition switch
and you will need help checking the lights.
• Turn on the parking lights and check that both front parking
lights are lighted.
• Turn the headlights on, and check that they are working.
Cars have both low-beam and high-beam lights. The high-
beam light allows the driver to see farther down the road at
night when other cars are not oncoming. Alternate between
the low- and high-beam lights. Be sure that the lights work
in each position.
• Move to the front of the car and check that all light lenses
are free of dirt. Dirty lenses can greatly decrease the
headlights’ ability to light the road.
• Check to be sure all dashboard lights are working and all
instruments are properly lighted.
• Operate the turn signals to make sure each front and rear
directional signal light works. This step may require that
the ignition switch be turned on. This should be done by an
adult or under close adult supervision. The directional-signal
indicators on the dashboard will flash if the turn signals
are operating.
• Check the emergency flashing system. Turning the system
on will cause all turn-signal lights to flash at the same time.
Emergency flashers should not be used during normal
driving conditions.
• Using the manual switch, turn on the dome light (interior
light). Then turn the manual switch off and open each of the
doors (one at a time) to be sure that the interior lights come
on automatically.
• If the vehicle has any special lights, such as fog lights, check
them also.


44 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Auto Maintenance and Safety Checkups.
Now inspect the rear of the vehicle.
• Move the light switch to the parking light position. Tail lights
and the rear license plate light should be lighted.
• Move the light switch for the headlights to the “on” position.
Again, all rear lights should be lighted.
• Have an adult push the brake pedal. All brake lights
should be lighted for as long as the brake pedal is pushed.
The ignition switch may again have to be turned on, and
this should be done only with adult supervision.
• Now ask the adult to press the brake, start the car, and
put the gearshift lever into reverse. Stand safely clear of
the rear of the vehicle while you check that both backup
lights are working.
• Be sure all switches and controls are returned to the proper
“off” positions after your check.
Windshields and Windows
Both sides of the windshield and windows should be kept clear
and clean at all times. If the glass is cracked or broken, the
window or windshield should be replaced. Be sure stickers or
heavily tinted windows do not block the driver’s vision. In most
states, all required stickers should be in the lower right-hand or
left-hand corner of the windshield. Under adult supervision, use
the following procedure to check that windshield wipers are
operating properly:
1. Wet the windshield with plenty of water so that dry, hard
dirt will not scratch it.
2. Put the vehicle in park and engage the parking brake.
Turn on the vehicle’s ignition and switch on the windshield
wipers. If the wipers operate at variable speeds, check each
speed. Each wiper arm and blade should sweep across the
windshield with a smooth, even motion without hitting the
other blade or any part of the frame. Turn the wipers off.
3. Check the rubber wiper blades. They will need to be
replaced from time to time, because summer heat and
winter ice damage them. Many drivers give little thought
to the blades until they need to use them. Check the blades
with a simple “smear-and-clear” test. Mix soap powder or


TRAFFIC SAFETY 45
.Auto Maintenance and Safety Checkups
liquid soap with a small amount of water and whip the suds
until they are thick and heavy. Smear or spray the solution
onto the windshield and turn on the wipers. If the rubber
blades do not clear the glass completely in about three
wipes, they should be replaced. Try the same test with
the new wiper blades and notice how quickly they clean
the glass.
The windshield washer is also necessary for good vision
in bad weather or when your windshield becomes dirty.
Every time you open the hood for an oil check, check the
fluid in the washer container. In cold winter months, be sure
to use winterized washer fluid, which has additives to prevent
it from freezing.
Tires
The condition of the tires dramatically affects a driver’s ability
to control his or her vehicle. The design, tread, and inflation of
the tires and the condition of the road—wet, icy, or dry—are
important factors. When tires do not hold to the road during
acceleration or braking, a vehicle can go into an uncontrollable
skid. It is important to check a vehicle’s tires to determine con-
ditions that may cause poor traction or skidding.
Follow this simple procedure to check your vehicle’s tires,
including the spare.
1. With a tire gauge, check the air pressure in each tire to
make sure it matches the recommendations in the owner’s
manual. Overinflated or underinflated tires can negatively
affect a car’s braking, stability, and ability to turn.
Incorrect tire pressure can also decrease gas mileage
and cause tires to wear out more quickly.
Always check the tire pressure when the
tires are cold, since pressures can increase
6 psi (pounds per square inch)
or more when the tires are hot
from driving. Check the
owner’s manual for
more information.
If your vehicle has
a rear windshield
wiper, use the
same smear-and-
clear procedure
to find out if the
rear wiper needs
to be replaced.
Tire gauge


46 TRAFFIC SAFETY
2. Check the sidewalls and treads for cracks,
cuts, bulges, blisters, and embedded nails,
glass, or other foreign objects. (Do not rub your
hand over the tire because you could cut yourself if
something is embedded in the rubber.)
3. Check the tread carefully. Badly worn or bald tires can
cause skidding, particularly when it is raining. A tire needs
replacing when the tread is worn down to 1⁄16 of an inch.
Some tires have wear indicator bars
built into the tread. When the tread
is worn down to the solid bar of
rubber across the width of the
tread, it is time to replace the tire. A
simple test to measure tread depth
on a tire is to place a penny with
Lincoln’s head upside down and
facing you into a tread groove. If the
top of Lincoln’s head is visible, then
it is time to replace the tire.
When replacing tires on a
vehicle, follow the vehicle manufacturer’s recommendation
for tire type and size. When your family buys new tires, be
sure to get good-quality tires, and make sure all four tires
match. New tires should be professionally balanced. Your tires
will wear unevenly if your tires are not balanced and aligned
properly. If the vehicle pulls to one side when it is driven on a
straight, level road, the car is probably out of alignment. This
will cause uneven wear to the tires, which can ultimately cause
a blowout. A mechanic should check for this problem.
The tire pressure stamped on the
sidewall of a tire is the maximum
allowable pressure—not the
recommended pressure. Always
check the owner’s manual to find
out how much air to put in your tires.
Never mix tire construction types—bias-ply, bias-belted, and radial—on
the same vehicle or use the wrong size tires, because doing so can cause
dangerous handling conditions.
MAXIMUM COLD
INFLATION AND LOAD


TRAFFIC SAFETY 47
.Auto Maintenance and Safety Checkups
Motor Vehicle Inspection and Registration
The goal of state inspection and registration programs is to
ensure that vehicles are properly equipped and maintained for
safe use. They also help ensure that vehicles are driven safely
by making sure the vehicle and the responsibility for driving
the vehicle is registered to a specific person.
Depending on the state, inspections may be
required once or twice a year. Some states make
inspections at random by stopping cars on the
road, and some require an inspection when a
car is sold. Find out how often inspections are
required in your state.
All states require that automotive vehicles
be registered and licensed with the state.
Keeping records of vehicles in this way
helps make highways safer by giving
officials ready information about who
owns the vehicle and is responsible for
its safe operation; reducing the chances
of the theft of a vehicle; and aiding in
inspections and recalls for repairs of
manufacturing defects.
Three Items You Should Carry With You
When You Drive
In the United States, any time you drive a vehicle, you should carry the
following items with you:
• A current driver’s license from the state where you live
• Proof of insurance on your vehicle
Failure to comply carries steep penalties, including the loss of your
driver’s license. If you drive without insurance and you have an
accident, you and your family will be personally responsible for all
costs associated with replacing or repairing your vehicle, the vehicles
you hit, and for all medical costs associated with injuries, which could
amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars. You may also be subject
to lawsuits by the injured parties and their insurance companies.
• The current registration document for the car you are driving. Most
people keep this document in the vehicle’s glove box.





TRAFFIC SAFETY 49
.Encounters With Law Enforcement While Driving
Encounters With
Law Enforcement
While Driving
Undoubtedly, through your school years, you have met law
enforcement officers in your school or at a Scout meeting as
part of a community-oriented policing program. Programs like
these are designed so that students can be introduced to police
officers in a friendly environment.
As a new driver, you might make a mistake while driving
that is observed by a police officer. Just as in school when you
make a mistake and are corrected by your teacher, the police
officer must correct your mistake to make you a safer driver.
Police officers have seen the results of dangerous driving
and have investigated fatal car accidents or car collisions that
resulted in serious injuries. They have also had to make “next
of kin” notifications, which means the officers have had to
knock on a home door and be the first one to tell a parent that
their child has been killed in a motor-vehicle collision.
These police officers have seen the same mistakes you
might have made directly result in the death or serious injury to
someone else. If you make a mistake and get pulled over,
remember: The police officer would rather pull you over then
have to investigate your fatal collision.
So, what do you do if you are being pulled over by a police
officer?
Do not panic! The police officer knows the area and will
pull you over in a safe location. Your job is to slow down and
pull over on the right side of the road, or follow the directions
or signals of the police officers. Do not abruptly stop or pull
over to the left side of the roadway. If it is obvious that there is
an exit ramp, a side street, or a parking lot where the police
officer is pulling you over, you will want to take advantage of
these safer locations.
It is normal to be
nervous during a
traffic stop, and
the police officer
is aware of this.


Encounters With Law Enforcement While Driving
Once stopped, place the vehicle in park, roll down your
windows, and keep your hands on the steering wheel. Do not
make abrupt movements. The police officer does not know
who you are. Remember, police officers stop cars all the
time—and most of the time, these traffic stops are uneventful,
but sometimes, the driver of a car will attempt to harm the
police officer during the traffic stop. The police officer pulling
you over has no idea if you are going to do something
dangerous. By keeping your hands on the steering wheel, you
are showing that you will not act dangerously.
As the police officer approaches your vehicle, interact
with them just as you would when talking to any other adult
authority figure, such as your Scoutmaster or your school
principal. Remember—this police officer is no different than
the police officers you have met in your school or during
other positive and uneventful interactions you have previously
had with police officers throughout your life.
It is normal to be nervous during a traffic stop, and the
police officer is aware of this. They have more than likely
pulled over hundreds—if not thousands—of drivers in their
career. You are not their first traffic stop. So while it is
understandable to be nervous, try and relax.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 51
..Encounters With Law Enforcement While Driving
If you do not know why you are being pulled over, wait
patiently while the officer explains to you the reason. It might be
that you have a broken brake light that you were not aware of,
and the police officer is simply pointing out the issue to you.
Maybe you know why you are being pulled over. Still,
wait and let the police officer explain the reason for the traffic
stop. The officer will likely start by asking you for your
driver’s license, vehicle registration, and proof of insurance.
Always make sure you have these items with you when
you are driving.
A Scout is courteous—and this applies during the traffic
stop. If you feel uncomfortable, explain this to the police
officer.
If you believe you need to speak with your parent or
guardian during the traffic stop, explain this to the police
officer, too. The police officer may or may not let you speak
with your parents (e.g. via a cellphone call) during the traffic
stop. However, you can always ask.
Be courteous and respectful. Keep in mind that the police
officer is trying to help you or correct a dangerous situation so
no one will be hurt or killed because of your driving.





TRAFFIC SAFETY 53
.Sharing the Road
Sharing the Road
As a Scout, you understand the importance of sharing and
working together to make sure things go smoothly. Scouts
always have backup plans in case of emergencies. The same
should hold true for Scouts on the road. Safe driving means
sharing the road with other drivers and being aware of those
who are using the road with you. Sometimes it means putting
your defensive driving skills to use by avoiding people who are
driving recklessly or noticing a child on a side street and
braking in time to avoid hitting the youngster as he or she darts
out into the street after a ball. Safe driving also means sharing
the road with everybody who uses it, including pedestrians,
bicycles, motorcycles, trucks, buses, and stray or wild animals.
Bicycle Safety
Riding a bike in traffic with bigger, faster, heavier four-wheeled
vehicles is often dangerous and scary. The number of bicycles
and vehicles sharing the road continues to grow every year and
so, too, do accidents involving both.
In traffic, bicycles are considered vehicles and traffic laws that
apply to cars also apply to bicyclists. Rules of the road to help
ensure bicycle safety include the following:
• Always ride on the right side of the road, with traffic, just as
cars travel. It’s the law. Never ride against traffic. Drivers do
not expect to meet a bicyclist when they round a corner or
go over a hill.
• Obey traffic signals and signs. Be extra careful at crosswalks.
Walk the bicycle across busy intersections. Watch for turning
vehicles, and make eye contact with drivers to make sure
they see you.
• Always check behind you when changing lanes, and use
hand signals to indicate turns, lane changes, and stops.
More than
25 percent of all
bicyclists killed
in traffic crashes
every year are
between the
ages of 5 and
15 years old.
Many more are
treated at hospital
emergency
rooms annually.


54 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
• Keep yourself a safe distance from cars and be prepared to
stop. Keep your hands on or close to the brakes and allow
yourself enough room to stop under the conditions in which
you are riding. Ride at least 3 feet away from parked cars.
• Be predictable and ride in a straight line. Do not swerve or
make sudden turns. Drivers may not be able to react fast
enough to avoid colliding with you.
• Never carry a passenger on your handlebars.
If bicycle lanes
are provided,
stay in the
designated lane.
Using Hand Signals
Bicycles do not have automatic turn
signals as cars do. Nevertheless,
you must signal when you plan to
turn. Hand signals tell motorists
what you intend to do. To make a
left turn, look behind you, hold your
left arm straight out and proceed
carefully. For a right turn, hold your
left arm out and up in an L shape.
When you plan to slow down or
come to a stop, hold your left
arm down and away from your
body, with the fingers pointing
down and your palm facing the
traffic behind you. Proper signaling
is a matter of the law, courtesy,
and self-protection.
The Cycling merit badge
pamphlet can provide more
details on bicycling safety.
See also Scouting America Bike
Safety Guidelines, found in the
Guide to Safe Scouting.
Left-turn signal
Right-turn signal
Stop or slow-down signal


TRAFFIC SAFETY 55
.Sharing the Road
Be Highly Visible
Cyclists must make themselves highly visible on the road to
motorists, pedestrians, and other cyclists. During the day, you
should wear light-colored clothing. Even better are fluorescent-
yellow and safety-orange clothing. Try not to ride at night, but
if you must, wear special clothing made from reflective
materials. Retroreflective vests, jackets, wristbands, and triangle
patches are designed to bounce back
motorists’ headlight beams and will
increase your visibility. Use at least
one light source, such as a bright
headlight supplemented by bicycle
reflectors. A red taillight also is
highly recommended. Many states
have specific rules regarding lighting
and nighttime bike riding. Find out
what your state requirements are for
nighttime bike riding.
Inside the Black Box
To see the difference in nighttime
visibility between a bicyclist or
a pedestrian wearing reflective
clothing and a rider or pedestrian
without lights or reflective
clothing, make a black box. Paint
a box inside and outside with
black paint. Inside, on the back of
the box, place reflective material,
fluorescent fabric, white fabric,
yellow fabric, and black (or other
dark-colored) fabric. Cut a small
hole in the side of the box for
a small flashlight to fit into.
Make another hole in the front
of the box and look through it.
You will see the difference
between the dark cloth and
the brighter materials.


56 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
Always Wear a Helmet
A bicycle helmet is a rider’s most important piece
of safety equipment. Helmets are designed to help
prevent injuries to the skull and brain. They are highly
effective—a bicycle helmet reduces the risk of serious
head and brain injury by nearly 90 percent.
A bicycle helmet that has passed mandatory safety
tests for how well it protects will have stickers inside the
shell stating that, according to its manufacturer, it meets the
specifications of the American National Standards Institute
(ANSI) or the Snell Memorial Foundation, or both. You should
use only helmets that carry one or both of these stickers. In order
to protect your head if you have a fall or collision, the helmet
must fit you correctly and securely, as shown in the diagram.
Motorcycle Safety
Motorcycles use the same roads as cars and trucks and travel
at similar speeds. A motorcycle, however, has two significant
differences: instability and vulnerability. A motorcycle’s two
wheels cannot provide the same stability as a car’s four wheels
and thus requires more physical coordination than driving a car.
Road conditions such as potholes, gravel, wet or slippery
surfaces, pavement seams, railroad crossings, and grooved
pavements that are minor annoyances to motorists can be
major hazards to a motorcycle rider.
Before you get out on the open road on a motorcycle, take a
nationally recognized course in motorcycle safety and defensive
driving. Then get a lot of practice on rural roads and quiet side
streets before you venture out in traffic. Because motorcycles
vary in handling and responsiveness, you should ride a new or
unfamiliar machine only in a controlled area until you are
confident you can operate it safely.
Most deaths from
bike falls and
collisions are
from head injuries.
Correctly positionedToo far back Too far forward
Riders who
have fewer than
six months of
experience on
their bikes are
involved in more
than half of all
vehicle-motorcycle
accidents.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 57
.Sharing the Road
On a motorcycle, a person does not have the
protection that a car’s metal body structure affords, so a
motorcyclist is much more vulnerable to injury. For this reason,
motorcyclists must drive extremely defensively. In collisions
between motorcycles and other vehicles, drivers often report that
they “just didn’t see the motorcycle.” Riders can enhance their
visibility by applying reflective materials to the motorcycle,
wearing bright-colored clothing, keeping the motorcycle
headlights on at all times, and weaving slightly within the lane
when they are behind a motorist so that the motorist will become
aware of the presence of the motorcycle.
Pedestrian Safety
Pedestrian safety is a serious issue because people who
are walking across a roadway lose in any accident with a
vehicle. Each year, nearly 5,000 pedestrians die in traffic
crashes. Greater caution and courtesy by both drivers and
pedestrians could prevent many of these fatalities.
Pedestrian safety means much more than just getting out
of the way. Pedestrians must follow the rules and
messages conveyed by roadside signs and markings. Here
are specific safety guidelines for pedestrians.
• Always try to cross the street at a crosswalk or an
intersection with a traffic signal. Even with traffic
controls, intersections are dangerous for pedestrians. A
significant percentage of pedestrian accidents occur at
intersections. Be sure you look behind you and all around
you for approaching cars before stepping off the curb.
Always wear a helmet when you are on a motorcycle,
regardless of whether your state requires them. A
helmet will help protect you from serious, often
fatal, head injuries.
These safety guidelines also apply to street-legal scooters and mopeds.
Vehicles that are not street legal, such as go-carts and all-terrain
vehicles (ATVs), should not be used for transportation on any public
road or thoroughfare.


58 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
• When crossing a street, stop and
look left, then right, then left
again, before stepping out. If you
see a car, wait until it goes by and
then look left, right, and left again
until no cars are coming.
• Dress to be seen. Brightly colored
clothing makes it easier for drivers
to see you during the day. At
night, wear white or light-colored
clothing and reflective material on
your shoes, cap, or jacket to reflect
the headlights of cars coming
toward you.
• Walk on sidewalks whenever they are available. If there
are no sidewalks, walk facing traffic so that you can see any
car that might go out of control. Walk as far off the roadway
as possible.
Steps to Take After an Accident
Accidents can be extremely scary experiences, so it is important to “be
prepared” beforehand as to what steps you should take if you are ever
involved in a car collision.
1. Stop your vehicle as soon as it is safely possible. If you cannot stop
quickly, stop as soon as you can.
2. If there is only minor damage and you can safely do so, move the
vehicle off the road. If it is too badly damaged to move, turn on the
hazard lights to make your vehicle visible to other drivers behind you.
3. Turn off the ignition and check for gas leaks. If you see any fluid
leaking from underneath the car, get away and stay clear of the
immediate area. Make sure you and any passengers, or occupants
of other vehicles involved, are out of the way of traffic.
4. Stay calm. Adrenaline may be pulsing through your body right now,
but don’t lose your cool. Check yourself and others for any injuries.
If a person is seriously injured, do not attempt to move him or her
unless there is immediate danger.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 59
.Sharing the Road
5. Call the police and ask for an ambulance if needed. Alert the police to
any injuries and make sure you let them know if the accident is
blocking the roadway. Get your bearings first so you can tell them
where the accident is located.
6. Exchange information with the other driver. All drivers involved should
exchange their name, telephone number, address, driver’s license number,
the name of their insurance company, the insurance policy number, and
insurance company’s phone number. Write down the make, model, year,
and license plate number of the vehicle or vehicles involved and the names
of any passengers that were in vehicles at the time of the accident.
7. If it is a serious accident and people stop to help, ask them to write
down what they saw along with their name and telephone number.
This is called a witness statement. If it is a serious accident and the
witness cannot stay until police arrive to help, ask them to sign their
statement and leave it with you to give the police. If you can, draw
a diagram of the scene, showing where the cars were located and in
which lanes the vehicles were traveling at the time of impact. Write
down the date, time, and any contributing weather or road conditions.
8. Many law enforcement officers and insurance companies suggest that
drivers utilize their cell phone camera or carry a disposable camera
with film in their glove compartment so if they are involved in an
accident they can take pictures of the damaged vehicles, the roadway
where the accident happened, and any skid marks.
9. When you speak with police, remember to answer their questions
politely and say “sir” or “ma’am” when you speak to any adults or law
enforcement personnel. Give your account of what happened as calmly
as possible. Have your insurance information and your driver’s license
ready to show them.
10. So that you will know where to get a copy of the police report, find
out the specific police department, sheriff’s department, or highway
patrol that responded to the accident.
11. Don’t leave the accident until police release you to do so. If your
vehicle is too badly damaged to drive it safely, call a tow truck to
take it to your home or a repair shop.
12. Once you are cleared from the scene and able to, contact your insurance
company. Give them the information about the accident and the contact
information for the other person’s insurance company.


60 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
Pedestrian Crossing Signals
Pedestrians need to understand crossing signals. Some
signals at pedestrian crossings use “Walk,” or the
symbol of a pedestrian, which means pedestrians may
cross the street after making certain it is safe. A flashing
“Don’t Walk” message or the flashing orange symbol of
a hand is a warning that the permitted time period for
crossing is ending. Pedestrians already in the street
should continue across to the other side or to a safety
island. Pedestrians still on the curb should remain there
until the next “Walk” signal. A steady (nonflashing)
orange “Don’t Walk” or a steady orange hand symbol
means that pedestrians are not permitted to leave the
curb because the light is about to change or has changed.
If an intersection
does not have
pedestrian signals
but has traffic
signals, use them.
Watch the traffic
signal that
controls traffic
going in the
desired direction.
Wait until you
have a green light
before crossing.
Before you cross
the street, always
check to make sure
no vehicles are
turning in to your
pedestrian lane.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 61
.Sharing the Road
School Bus Safety
More than 20 million
students ride the bus to
school on weekdays. School
buses are one of the safest
forms of transportation
around. The greatest
potential danger is not in
riding the bus but in getting
on and off or in moving
around the bus.
Here are some safety guidelines for boarding and getting off of
school buses.
• Be at the bus stop at least five minutes before the bus is due
to arrive. If you are late for the bus, do not run recklessly
across a street or down a road to catch it.
• When the bus approaches, step back and stand at least five
long steps (10 feet) from the curb. That way the bus driver
can pull up to the curb so you won’t have to walk out into
the street to board.
• Wait until the bus comes to a complete stop, the door opens,
and the driver says it is OK to board before stepping onto
the bus.
• If you drop something near or under the bus while getting on
or off, tell the driver. Make sure the driver sees you, knows
you are there, and won’t begin to drive away as you are
trying to pick up what you dropped.
• Use the handrail when you get off the bus. It will help you
keep your balance if you stumble.
• Make sure that key chains, clothing, or your backpack does
not snag on the handrail or get caught in the door. You could
be dragged along beside the bus if the bus driver does not
notice you and drives off.
• When getting off a school bus, walk three steps away from
the door. Stay away from the bus’s wheels and watch out for
moving cars.


62 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
Danger Zones
It is never safe to walk
too close to the front of
a school bus. The bus
driver may be sitting
up too high to see you.
Always walk five long
steps ahead of the bus
before crossing in front
of it, and make eye
contact with the driver.
Other danger zones
include the sides and
rear of the bus. Never
walk close to the side
of a school bus. Stay at least three long strides away from the
side to stay out of the bus driver’s blind spot (the spot where
the driver cannot see you in the bus’s mirrors). Also, avoid
walking behind a school bus. The driver will not be able to see
you back there.
School Bus Safety for Motorists
Motorists driving in school zones must watch for students
traveling to and from school. Children can be unpredictable,
and it is the driver’s responsibility to anticipate and be ready
to react to what they may do. Following these guidelines will
help you be aware when you drive near schools or on routes
shared by school buses.
• Drive slowly. Watch for children walking in the street,
especially if there are no sidewalks in the neighborhood.
• Watch for children playing and gathering near school
bus stops.
• Be alert. Children arriving late for the bus might dash into
the street or out from between parked cars without looking
for traffic.
• Learn and obey the school bus laws in your state.
• Learn the system of flashing lights that the school bus
drivers use to alert motorists about stopping.
• At dawn and twilight, the semi-darkness can hinder the
ability to see children going to or from bus stops. Extreme
care must be taken at these times of the day.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 63
.Sharing the Road
What’s So Special About a School Bus?
School buses have a number of safety features.
• Yellow flashing lights mean the bus is about to stop and load or unload
riders. Cars must slow down and get ready to stop.
• Red flashing lights and an extended stop signal arm mean the bus has
stopped and passengers are getting on or off. When the lights are
flashing and the stop signal arm is extended, motorists traveling in all
directions must come to a complete stop at a safe distance from the
bus and resume driving only when the red lights have stopped
flashing, the arm is retracted, and the bus has begun moving again.
• Side and rearview mirrors let the driver see what is going on around
the bus—the cars approaching, the children walking up to the bus, and
the bikes that might be close by.
• Emergency exits in the bus allow for passengers’ quick escape and
should be used only in an emergency. In any emergency the riders
should listen to their driver for instructions.
• A crossing control arm is
mounted on the front bumper
and swings out when the
door is opened. The arm is
designed to keep children
from walking close to the
front of the bus.
Crossing
control arm


64 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Navigating the Road
Becoming skilled in reading road signs, signals, and markings is
important to your safety on the roads and highways. Equally
important is learning and practicing safe, defensive driving skills
and learning to anticipate and avoid potentially unsafe situations.
Traffic Signals
A traffic signal is a traffic-control device that is designed so that
everyone should instantly understand the message. Traffic
signal design is standardized internationally for that reason.
Red Light—STOP. A red light always means stop. All states
permit a right turn on a red light—after a stop—unless a sign
prohibits it.
Green Light—GO. A green light means go, when and if it is
safe to go. You may have the right-of-way, but always be sure
the intersection is clear before proceeding. Many accidents are
caused by drivers running red lights.
Yellow Light—CAUTION. A yellow light means that you should
enter the intersection only if you can do so safely.
Red Arrow—STOP. A red arrow light means that no turn is
permitted in the direction of the arrow.
Green Arrow—GO. A green arrow light means to go, only in the
direction of the arrow, when it is safe to proceed.
Yellow Arrow—CAUTION. A yellow arrow light means that if
you can do so safely, enter the intersection with caution and
yield to oncoming traffic.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 65
.Sharing the Road
Highway
traffic signs
communicate
their meaning
with shape,
color, symbols,
and pictorial
silhouettes.
Flashing Yellow—SLOW DOWN. Proceed with caution.
Flashing Red—STOP. A flashing red light is the same as a stop
sign. After stopping, proceed with caution when it is safe.
Traffic Signs
The shapes and colors of traffic signs have meaning. Some
signs, such as “Stop” and “Yield,” are so important that each
has its own distinctive standardized shape and color. Other
signs are grouped by color and shape. Most signs fit into
six groups.


66 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
Types of Traffic Signs
Regulatory Signs. Regulatory signs are typically rectangular, with black
words or pictures on a white background. The “Stop” and “Yield” signs
are exceptions. Symbol signs often include a red circle with a crossbar
to indicate a prohibition. Motorists are required to obey regulatory
signs. A police officer can give a driver a ticket for ignoring the
message. A speed-limit sign is a good example of a regulatory sign.
Warning Signs. Warning signs are typically diamond-shaped and yellow
with black words or pictures and a black edge. They are used to warn
drivers of a condition ahead that may not be expected. Exceptions to
the shape rule are the round “Railroad Crossing” symbol sign, the
pennant-shaped “No Passing Zone” sign, and the pentagon-shaped
“School Zone” and “School Crossing” symbol signs, which are
fluorescent yellow-green to enhance their visibility.
Guide Signs. Guide signs are the most variable in shape and color.
Guide signs include the large, rectangular, green signs used on
interstate highways and many freeways to give drivers route and
NO PASSING ZONE SLIPPERY WHEN WET SIGNAL AHEADRAILROAD CROSSING
STOP YIELD DO NOT ENTER NO PARKINGNO PEDESTRIANS
TOW-AWAY ZONE ONE-WAY TRAFFIC


TRAFFIC SAFETY 67
.Sharing the Road
destination information. Guide signs also include street signs and route
shields such as the distinctive interstate and U.S. highway shields. Each
state has its own standard marker for state and local routes.
Service Signs. Service signs are typically rectangular with white symbols
on a blue background. The symbols indicate the availability of services
such as gas, food, and lodging as well as phones and hospitals.
Recreation Signs. Recreation signs indicate that the road user is
approaching some type of public recreation area such as a camping area,
picnic area, or scenic overlook. These signs are rectangular with white
symbols on a brown background.
Work Zone Signs. Work zones, such as for highway
construction or utility work, are marked with orange
signs. These signs have information particular to work
zones such as “Flagger Ahead” on a diamond or an
ordinary symbol such as the curve warning. Work
zones present a special situation that demands that
drivers be alert and expect the unexpected. Men and
women working on the roads risk injury and death
just by being near traffic. Machinery and unfinished
roads can pose hazards to drivers. Fines issued in a
work zone can be doubled.
FLAGGER AHEAD
INTERSTATE ROUTE MARKERS INTERCHANGE EXITBIKE ROUTE
ACCESS FOR
HANDICAPPED
HOSPITAL DIESEL


68 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
Pavement Markings
Pavement markings, which are painted stripes on the road,
mark lanes on highways and provide information regarding
passing and changing lanes. These markings are typically either
white or yellow solid lines or white or yellow dashed lines.
White Lines. Solid white lines mark the right edge of the
road and are sometimes called “fog lines.” Solid white lines
also serve as a visual barrier to discourage lane changing in
certain situations, such as in turn lanes at an intersection
and where vehicles are entering or leaving a freeway. Dashed
white lines separate traffic in the same direction on roads
with multiple lanes.
Yellow Lines. Yellow lines mark the left edges of divided
highways and separate traffic traveling in opposite directions.
Double, solid yellow center lines mean no passing is allowed
in either direction. A single, dashed yellow center line means
that passing is allowed if the road ahead is clear.
YELLOW DASHED LINE
WHITE SOLID LINE
YELLOW SOLID LINE
WHITE DASHED LINE
WHITE DASHED LINE DOUBLE WHITE SOLID LINE


TRAFFIC SAFETY 69
.Sharing the Road
School Zone and Railroad Crossings
Distinctive fluorescent yellow-green signs tell drivers
that they are approaching school zones. Drivers should
slow down and pay careful attention to warning signs
and speed limits that appear along with these markings.
Be familiar with signals or markings for railroad
crossings as well. A roadway–rail grade crossing
presents an unusual traffic situation for motorists. Many
drivers do not cross railroad tracks often enough to be
familiar with the warning devices designed for their
safety. Some ignore all warning signals and markings
because they are in a hurry and would rather beat the
train than wait for it to pass. Driver inattention and
impatience are the most common factors contributing to
collisions between motor vehicles and trains at
roadway–rail grade crossings. Remember, motor vehicles
always lose in these kinds of collisions.
Safety Tips for Railroad Crossings
• Never drive around lowered gates
at a railroad crossing. It is illegal
and deadly.
• Never race a train to a crossing.
Even if you tie, you lose.
• If your vehicle stalls on a crossing,
immediately get everyone out of
the vehicle and far away from the
tracks. Call the local law-enforce-
ment agency for assistance.
• If you are at a multiple-track
crossing waiting for a train to
pass, watch out for a second train
on the other tracks that could be
approaching from either direction.
• Always expect a train. Freight trains do not follow set schedules.
• Be aware that trains cannot stop quickly. A freight train moving at
55 miles per hour can take a mile or more to stop once the emergency
brakes are applied. That’s the length of 18 football fields!
Be sure to obey all warning signals and
markings at railroad crossings.


70 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Interstate Highways
Interstate highways are a system of interconnecting highways that
crisscross the United States. They are numbered in a pattern to
help aid navigation. One- or two-digit even-numbered interstate
routes are east–west highways. (Even though locally they might
not run east and west, overall they are intended to serve east–
west travel.) Route numbers increase from south (I-10) to north
(I-94). One- or two-digit odd-numbered interstates are north–
south highways. Numbers increase from west (I-5) to east (I-95).
.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 71
.Sharing the Road
Three-digit interstate highway numbers connect to other
major highways. If the first digit is an even number, the
highway usually connects to another interstate at both ends,
forming a beltway or loop. If the first digit is an odd number,
the highway usually connects to another interstate highway at
only one end, sometimes going into a city center.
Interstate highways show the distance between points with
mile markers placed along the road shoulder. Mile markers show
the number of miles from where the route entered the state,
or from the beginning of the route if it starts within the state.
The count starts at the state line in the south (for north–south
routes) or in the west (for east–west routes). Knowing how to
read mile markers can help you. Know where you are and
determine how far it is to your destination. You can give an
exact location if you need to report an emergency or need
assistance.
The interstate highway system crisscrosses the United States,
stretching more than 46,000 miles in all. The longest route is
Interstate 90, which covers more than 3,020 miles from Seattle,
Washington, to Boston, Massachusetts.
Texas contains
more than 3,232
miles of interstate
highway, the most
of any state.
New York has 29
interstate routes
contained entirely
within its borders,
more than any
other state.


72 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
Gauging Braking Distances
An alert and experienced driver knows that a car cannot stop
on a dime. Suppose you are traveling down the highway at 60
miles per hour when you notice a small child in the road. Your
vehicle will need approximately 150 feet to 172 feet to stop
depending on the road surface and the condition of the brakes
and tires. This distance is known as braking distance.
Being able to judge braking distance is very important,
but be aware that it is not the only factor that affects how far
a car will travel before it stops. Drivers also need time to
apply the brakes after they have decided to stop. The average
time that elapses between making the decision to stop and
actually applying the brakes—reaction time—is three-quarters
of a second. In this time, with the car going 60 miles per hour,
it will have traveled another 66 feet. If it takes the driver a
whole second to react, the car travels 88 feet. If a second and a
half pass, the vehicle travels 132 feet. This is known as
reaction-time distance (or driver-reaction distance). The table
shows approximate braking distances and reaction-time
distances on dry, level pavement for well-maintained cars
traveling at typical city and highway speeds.
Speed (mph)
30
40
50
60
70
Braking Distance (feet)
43
76
119
172
234
Average Reaction-Time Distance (feet)
33
44
55
66
77


TRAFFIC SAFETY 73
.Sharing the Road
One more time factor must be considered. This is the
period between the moment the driver recognizes there is a
dangerous problem and the instant the driver decides to take
action and apply the brakes This perception-time distance varies
widely, depending on the circumstances and the attentiveness
of the driver. The driver could be sleepy or distracted, have
poor eyesight, or be under the influence of alcohol or drugs.
This factor and the reaction time are highly variable, but they
are always present and will lengthen all braking distances.
Weather conditions such as rain, snow, sleet, and ice also
can affect stopping distances. On a wet road, stopping requires
up to four times the distance normally needed on a dry road.
When driving at about 50 miles per hour during a heavy rain,
the water can literally lift the vehicle’s tires off
the road. To prevent hydroplaning, you will
need to slow down. Heavy rain is not the only
factor that can cause a spin or slide. During a
light drizzle, a little water combined with the
oil that has accumulated on the road produces
a slick, greasy film that can decrease traction.
Time and a considerable amount of distance elapse
between the time you decide to apply the brakes and
the time your vehicle actually slows to a stop.
Braking Distances at Night
Visibility decreases at night, impairing a
driver’s ability to see and react to unexpected
situations. At night, when a driver can see
only as far as the headlights allow, the
difficulty of stopping in time to avoid an
accident increases. Low-beam headlights
allow the driver to spot an object on the road
about 160 feet ahead of the vehicle, but
headlights cannot follow curves, hills, or dips
in the road.


74 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
Driving at Safe Speeds
When traffic engineers design roadways, they determine safe
speed limits for the road. Many crashes are caused by traveling
at excessive speed, which requires more time and distance to
stop. There is less time to react, and the impact or striking
power of the vehicle greatly increases. If the vehicle’s speed
doubles from 20 to 40 miles per hour, the impact is actually
four times greater. Triple the speed from 20 to 60 miles per
hour, and the impact and the braking distance are nine times
greater. Drivers should be fully aware of the potential
destructive power of a speeding vehicle.
When conditions are less than ideal, a person operating a motor
vehicle is required by law to drive at a careful and prudent
speed. You will need to decrease your speed, probably below the
posted speed limit, for any of the following conditions:
• Heavy, congested, or slow-moving traffic
• Rough, icy, or wet road surfaces, or other circumstances in
which traction is poor
• Narrow roadways that reduce the margin of safety
• Weather conditions (rain, snow, fog, dust, smoke) that affect
sight distance and traction
Aggressive Drivers: Avoiding Road Rage
Despite the legal and safety ramifications of speeding and
driving recklessly, you will undoubtedly encounter aggressive
drivers on the road and it is best to be prepared. Aggressive
drivers are those who run stop signs and red lights, drive too
fast, tailgate (follow too closely), weave in and out of traffic,
pass on the right instead of the left, make rude gestures, or
scream, honk, and flash their lights at motorists who are
unlucky enough to be in front of them. Also known as road
rage, aggressive driving puts everyone in the vicinity of the
aggressive driver in danger. Here is what to do if you are con-
fronted by an aggressive driver.
Glare recovery is another problem that may affect stopping distances at
night. The glare from the headlights of oncoming traffic causes the pupil
of the eye to constrict. Once past the bright light, the pupil needs time
to readjust to less light. During the adjustment time, a driver could be
blinded, greatly increasing his or her chances of having an accident.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 75
.Sharing the Road
• Try to get out of the person’s way. Do not further anger the
aggressive driver by speeding up or attempting to keep him
or her from passing.
• Avoid making eye contact with the enraged driver.
• Do not respond to rude gestures, screaming, or incessant
honking. Doing so will likely escalate the situation.
• If you have a mobile phone, find a safe place to pull over
and call the police (911 or the emergency number for your
local area). Report the aggressive driver and provide the
police with details about the driver’s location, direction of
travel, license number, and vehicle make and model.
Road rage can be contagious. If you find that a driver’s aggressive
behavior is making you angry, take a deep breath and try to relax
and let your anger dissipate.
If you find yourself riding with a driver who is driving
aggressively and dangerously, do not grab the steering
wheel. Such a move can instantly cause a crash. Try to
find a believable excuse for the driver to stop the car.
Saying that you are going to be sick probably would
work. Then leave and call home for a ride or make other
arrangements for safe transportation.


76 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Sharing the Road.
Ten Deadly Teen Driver Mistakes—and How
to Avoid Them
This list comes from AAA, the American Automobile Association.
1. Risk Taking. Don’t do something you’ll regret for the rest of
your life. Car crashes are the leading cause of injury and
death for teens. And it’s not just about you: Crashes affect
pedestrians, passengers, and other drivers, as well as
their families.
2. Texting and Talking. Focus on driving. Texting increases
crash risk by 23 times. Talking on a cell phone while driving
can double reaction time. Save the texting, phone calls, and
other gadgets for after the driving is done.
3. Un-Buckled. Use a safety belt and insist that all your
passengers do so as well. About two-thirds of teens killed in
vehicle crashes were not wearing safety belts. Wearing a
seat belt reduces your chances of being hurt or killed in a
crash by 45 percent.
4. Music. Turn the music off while learning to drive. Don’t be
distracted by the music controls—always keep your hands,
eyes, and ears on the road. Adjusting music is a common
distraction for teen drivers.
5. Speed. Stick to the speed limit. One-third of teen fatalities
involve speeding. Obeying the speed limit reduces the
severity of a crash you can’t avoid.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 77
.Sharing the Road
6. Rowdy Riders. Don’t load up your car with friends. Adding
one teen passenger to a vehicle increases a teen driver’s
crash risk by about 50 percent. With two or more teen
passengers, the crash risk is fivefold.
7. DUI/Drugs. Stay sober and drug-free. The risk of involvement
in a motor vehicle crash is greater for teens under the
influence of alcohol or drugs—even prescription drugs.
8. Late Night Driving. Teen crash rates at night (9 p.m.
to 6 a.m.) are twice as high as daytime rates. Obey
curfews from your parents or guardian.
9. Peer Pressure. Make good choices and don’t be afraid to
“speak up.” Before you get in the car with a friend, ask: Is
this a person you trust? Is he or she in the right frame of
mind to drive safely? Are you prepared to speak up if the
person drives dangerously?
10. Overconfidence. Overconfidence can lead to crashes when
new drivers encounter unfamiliar or unexpected situations.
Parents should supervise and monitor their teen drivers—even
after they get their license.





.Traffic, Your Community, and You
Traffic, Your Community,
and You
To complete requirement 5, you have three options. If you
decide to complete requirement 5(a), you will need to interview
a traffic law enforcement officer in your community to find out
which three traffic safety problems are of most concern to that
officer. Discuss these concerns and possible solutions with your
counselor.
If you elect to do requirement 5(b), you will research safe
driving for teenagers and create a personal safety
pledge. The resources section at the back of this
pamphlet lists sites you might visit. Take notes
as you read the information on the sites, or
print out pages that contain information you
feel is especially important for teens to
understand. Discuss your findings and your
pledge with your counselor.
If you decide to do requirement 5(c), you
will initiate and organize an activity to
demonstrate the importance of traffic safety. The
remainder of this chapter has a variety of ideas
that can be adapted for your merit badge
project. These suggestions may help get
your creativity flowing and provide
the spark needed to create your
own project.


Traffic, Your Community, and You.
Organizing Traffic Safety Programs
and Activities
The following are examples of traffic safety programs and
activities that young people have successfully developed in
their schools and communities.
Buckle Up!
When a high school student in Frederic, Wisconsin, was killed
in a crash because he was not wearing a safety belt, fellow
classmates launched a “Buckle Up, Frederic!” campaign to
educate the community on the importance of using safety belts.
The students developed a safety belt survey, which they
conducted at the school and at a major intersection in town.
The surveys found that only 43 percent of students and
37 percent of other residents were wearing safety belts.
They published the results in a brochure that contained other
safety belt information and distributed the brochure and other
literature to the school and community. Other materials they
developed and activities they organized included the following:
• Displays on safety belt use for a local bank
• “Buckle Up!” fliers that they placed on car windshields
• A coloring contest on buckling up for grades 1 through 5
• Lesson plans for grades K through 8
• Presentations to elementary and middle school children
• A multimedia show on safety belt use for grades 9
through 11
Students wrote articles and editorials for local
newspapers and recorded public service announcements
(PSAs) with original music that aired on local
radio stations. The result? A second survey,
conducted after the campaign, showed a
37 percent increase in safety belt use
among students and a 33 percent increase
in the community overall.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 81
Bicycle Rodeo
Teaching biking safety to younger children by
organizing a bicycle rodeo promotes safe cycling in a
fun way. A bike event takes lots of planning. Here’s a checklist
to help you get started.
❑ Identify where the bike rodeo will be held and get permission
to use the location.
❑ Develop event and staffing schedules. Plan contests that
challenge balance and control and that test skills needed for
safe street riding. Suggested skills include the following:
• Riding slowly in a straight line for 60 feet. At about 30 feet,
the rider should look over his or her left shoulder to check
for traffic behind while maintaining a straight line.
• Maneuvering through an obstacle course to test the rider’s
ability to change directions quickly.
• Turning in a limited space to test the bicyclist’s ability to
turn around smoothly and easily.
• Signaling with the proper hand signals.
• Making a controlled stop.


82 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Traffic, Your Community, and You.
❑ Have educational materials on helmets, proper clothing for
biking, and other bike safety issues available to hand out to
participants at registration.
❑ Make a display of helmets to show contestants and
adults the different types available. Be prepared
to discuss national safety standards, fit, pricing, and
helmet replacement.
❑ Invite a uniformed police officer or a member of a bike
advocacy organization to be at your event to provide
information on bike riding rules.
❑ Invite someone from a local bike shop to provide
bike inspections.
❑ Provide engraving against theft. Engraving a parent or
guardian’s license plate number on the frame of the bike is
the easiest way to trace ownership if the bike is stolen.
❑ Arrange for refreshments. At the least, have water available.
Politely ask local stores and businesses if they would be
willing to donate snacks and beverages.
❑ Publicize your event. Post fliers, and write press releases to
distribute to newspapers, radio stations, and television stations.
BAAM (Bicycles, ATVs, Alcohol,
Motorcycles) Program
To help instill a responsible attitude toward
driving in teens who have not reached the
legal driving age, work with law enforcement
agencies and school groups to present a
week of traffic safety activities for middle
school students. Have students make daily
safety tip announcements for bicycles,
all-terrain vehicles (ATVs), and motorcycles.
Distribute printed materials about the
consequences of underage drinking.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 83
.Traffic, Your Community, and You
More Ideas
Here are some other ideas for traffic safety awareness activities.
• Organize a mock trial to show the legal consequences of
driving while impaired.
• Have an expert on traffic safety speak at a school assembly.
• Hold a schoolwide trivia quiz based on traffic safety facts
and statistics.
• Organize a “Save our Seniors” (SOS) program at a local high
school. Seniors who sign the SOS pledge will agree to stay
alcohol- and drug-free, always wear safety belts, and
maintain a clean driving record during their senior year.
• Organize a program for elementary school students on
pedestrian safety.
• Get involved with an existing group, such as SADD or your
student council, to promote traffic safety and the prevention
of alcohol and drug abuse.
SAVE OUR
SENIORS


From One Scout to Another
By an Eagle Scout and retired state trooper
Scouts, you are so fortunate to have your entire life in front of you.
Over my career as a state trooper, I had to be with many teenagers
on their last day of life.
Please, PLEASE! Your parents or guardian, your friends, and all the
people who care about you want you to be safe as a new driver.
Here are some important tips:
1) Always wear your seatbelt, both when you are driving and
when you are a passenger. I investigated so many fatal crashes in which
the occupant would be alive today if they had been wearing a seat belt.
2) Never text and drive. Pull over to a safe area and stop if you
think it’s that important to text or take a phone call.
3) Slow down. I guarantee that the time you think you are saving
by speeding is not worth it. And by speeding, you take away so many
options you have to avoid other traffic, debris, or unexpected events.
4) Space is your friend. While driving, leave space in front of you
and behind you—especially as a new driver. Space gives you room to
maneuver and avoid. Space gives you time to react.
5) Avoid spending time on the shoulder of a roadway. The
shoulder of a roadway/highway is a very dangerous area to stop. If you
break down, limp your car off the highway as far as possible.
6) Distractions are a fact of life while driving. Your phone will
distract you, your friends will distract you, music will distract you, and
eating/drinking will distract you. Before starting the car, answer this
question: How will you deal with these dangerous distractions?
7) Brake! If you see an emergency vehicle, tow truck, or highway
maintenance vehicle on the side of the road, many states require you to
slow down and/or move to a further lane (if safely possible).
Thanks for reading these tips. If you practice these tips, they will
become second nature as you gain experience as a new driver.
Good luck on your new adventures! Be safe out there.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 85
.Traffic Safety Resources
Scouting Literature
Automotive Maintenance, Citizenship in
the Community, Cycling, Emergency
Preparedness, Engineering, First Aid,
Railroading, Safety, and Truck
Transportation merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Aaseng, Nathan. Teens and Drunk
Driving. Lucent Books, 2000.
Alliance for Safe Driving.
License to Drive, 2nd ed. Cengage
Learning, 2005.
Berardelli, Phil. Safe Young Drivers:
A Guide for Parents and Teens, 4th
ed. Mountain Lake Press, 2008.
Booley, Theresa Anne. Alcohol
and Your Liver: The Incredibly
Disgusting Story. Rosen, 2000.
Burke, Edmund R. Serious Cycling, 2nd
ed. Human Kinetics, 2002.
Drive Right, 11th ed. Prentice Hall, 2008.
Elkins, Brett, and Bruce Elkins. Teach
Your Teen to Drive … and Stay
Alive. CreateSpace Independent
Publishing Platform, 2012.
Goodman, Karen, and Kirk Simon. Safe
Road Home: Stop Your Teen From
Drinking and Driving. Sterling, 2005.
Hewitt, Ben, ed. New Cyclist Handbook.
Rodale Inc., 2005.
James, Leon, and Diane Nahl. Road
Rage and Aggressive Driving:
Steering Clear of Highway Warfare.
Prometheus Books, 2000.
Pavelka, Ed, and Editors of Bicycling
Magazine. Bicycling Magazine’s
Complete Book of Road Cycling
Skills. Rodale Inc., 1998.
Pease, Robert A. How to Drive Into
Accidents and How Not To.
Pease Publishing, 1998.
Scotti, Anthony J. Professional Driving
Techniques: The Essential Guide to
Operating a Motor Vehicle With
Confidence and Skill, 4th ed.
PhotoGraphics Publishing, 2007.
Smith, Timothy C. Crash-Proof Your
Kids: Make Your Teen a Safer,
Smarter Driver. Touchstone, 2006.
Wallack, Roy M., and Bill Katovsky.
Bike for Life. Da Capo Press, 2014.
Traffic Safety Resources


86 TRAFFIC SAFETY
Traffic Safety Resources.
Organizations and Websites
Information is also available from your
local police department (traffic division),
sheriff’s department (traffic division),
state police or highway patrol, city or
county prosecutor’s office, traffic court,
emergency medical services (EMS), and
state highway safety office. Check your
local telephone directory for nonemer-
gency phone numbers and addresses.
American Automobile Association
Foundation for Traffic Safety
607 14th St. NW, Suite 201
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: 202-638-5944
aaafoundation.org
National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration
1200 New Jersey Ave. SE
Washington, DC 20590
Toll-free telephone: 888-327-4236
nhtsa.gov
National Safety Council
1121 Spring Lake Drive
Itasca, IL 60143-3201
Telephone: 630-285-1121
nsc.org
Road Ready
roadreadyapp.com
Safe Kids Worldwide
1255 23rd St., NW, Suite 400
Washington, DC 20037-1151
Telephone: 202-662-0600
safekids.org
Teendriving.com
teendriving.com
Texting & Driving: It Can Wait
itcanwait.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America is grateful to the fol-
lowing for their assistance in preparing
the Traffic Safety merit badge
pamphlet.
• Steven Gale, executive director,
Binghamton Metropolitan
Transportation Study, for his
time and subject expertise
• Capt. Robert Sooter, Marble Falls
(Texas) Police Department
• Chief of Police Bill Lane, Horseshoe
Bay (Texas) Police Department
• Texas Department of Transportation,
in particular Marc Broadstock,
Theresa Lopez, Nelson Wellspeak,
and Tai Tan Nguyen
• James Jay Cash, Certified Fire
Protection Specialist, and Karl
Osborn, Certified Safety Professional,
Aon Risk Services
• Sgt. Michael Coleman and Officer
Mark Vincent, Irving (Texas)
Police Department
• Kenneth Copeland, National
Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, Region VI
• Craig Goodwyn, Certified Utility
Safety Administrator
Your state Department of Motor
Vehicles will also be a good
resource. Look in the telephone
book or, with your parent or
guardian’s permission, search the
internet.


TRAFFIC SAFETY 87
.Traffic Safety Resources
• Carlton Hayden, Office of
Highway Safety Federal
Highway Administration
• Jim Saxon, Arlington ISD
Transportation System
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating
this pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
AT&T, courtesy—page 13 (logo)
National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, courtesy—pages 12,
20, and 36 (all)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 29, 30, 46, 55, 56, and 68
Scouting America gives special thanks to AAA, the
American Automobile Association, for its assistance
with this edition of the Traffic Safety merit badge
pamphlet. We are especially grateful to Mark
Kulewicz (director, Traffic Engineering and Safety,
AAA New York) and Justin McNaull (director, State
Relations) for spearheading the creation of the list “Ten Deadly
Teen Driver Mistakes—and How to Avoid Them” especially for this
merit badge and pamphlet. Mr. Kulewicz is a longtime Scouter and
counselor for the Traffic Safety merit badge. Scouting America thanks
AAA, Mr. Kulewicz, and Mr. McNaull for their time and subject expertise.
Thanks also to Dennis Crossley (chief executive officer, AAA New York)
for his support of this project.


Get ahead in Scouting with Scout Life magazine. It’s loaded with the
latest news on merit badges and other advancement tools. Plus, it’s got
outdoor adventure, games and comics, leadership tips, life skills, stories
about other Scouts and more. It’s just what you need to succeed.
Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts.