WHITEWATER


WHITEWATER
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35965
ISBN 978-0-8395-3405-1
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing
Note to the Counselor
Merit badge counselors are responsible for following the
requirements, procedures, and techniques presented in this
pamphlet and ensuring that each Scout earning the merit
badge is able to demonstrate knowledge and skills at a level
consistent with the requirements. In addition, counselors must
ensure that all applicable Scouting America safety policies,
including Safe Swim Defense and Safety Afloat, are followed
during training, practice, and review.
Counselors for the Whitewater merit badge must be registered
members of Scouting America, have current training in Safety
Afloat, and be approved by the local council advancement
committee. Councils with an aquatics committee should utilize
that committee to coordinate with the advancement committee
for approval of qualified counselors.
All counselors should have formal training in the knowledge
and skills indicated by the requirements, experience in teaching
such skills to youth, and experience in identifying and managing
risks associated with the activities involved. For the Whitewater
merit badge, appropriate credentials include American Canoe
Association level 3 or higher river kayaking or river canoeing
instructor certification. The council advancement committee
may approve counselors with similar experience and training in
knowledge, skill, safety, and instruction.


WHITEWATER 3
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Whitewater or check Scoutbook for the latest
requirements.


4 WHITEWATER


WHITEWATER 5


6 WHITEWATER


WHITEWATER 7
Contents
Safe Fun . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Reading a River . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
Boats, Paddles, and Other Equipment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Basic Whitewater Skills . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
Whitewater Maneuvers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Rescue Techniques . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 67
Trip Planning . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Whitewater Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 78





WHITEWATER 9
.Safe Fun
Safe Fun
Safe whitewater fun demands respect—respect for the river’s
power, your abilities, and your companions’ safety. Canoeing
or kayaking safely on whitewater is a matter of developing
and practicing your skills and using good judgment.
Have a great time and play hard, but play safe.
Scouting America Safety Afloat
When earning any of the aquatic merit badges,
it is essential that you follow safety rules and
use self-discipline and wise judgment. Tackling
your first whitewater adventure will be challeng-
ing and rewarding if you understand and follow
the nine points of Safety Afloat outlined below. These
guidelines were developed to promote boating and boating
safety and to set standards for safe unit activity afloat in
flatwater or in whitewater.
1. QUALIFIED SUPERVISION
All activity afloat must be supervised by a mature and
conscientious adult age 21 or older who understands and
knowingly accepts responsibility for the well-being and safety of
those in his or her care and who is trained in and committed to
compliance with the nine points of Scouting America Safety
Afloat. That supervisor must be skilled in the safe operation of the
craft for the specific activity, knowledgeable in accident
prevention, and prepared for emergency situations. If the adult
with Safety Afloat training lacks the necessary boat operating and
safety skills, then he or she may serve as the supervisor only if
assisted by other adults, camp staff personnel, or professional tour
guides who have the appropriate skills. Additional leadership is
provided in ratios of one trained adult, staff member, or guide per
10 participants. At least one leader must be trained in first aid
The complete text
of Safety Afloat
may be found in
the Guide to Safe
Scouting on the
Scouting America
website: www.
scouting.org.


10 WHITEWATER
Safe Fun.
including CPR. Any swimming done in conjunction with the
activity afloat must be supervised in accordance with Scouting
America Safe Swim Defense standards. It is strongly recommended
that all units have at least one adult or older youth member
currently trained in Scouting America Aquatics Supervision: Paddle
Craft Safety to assist in the planning and conduct of all activities
afloat.
2. PERSONAL HEALTH REVIEW
A complete health history is required of all participants as
evidence of fitness for boating activities. Forms for minors must
be signed by a parent or legal guardian. Participants should be
asked to relate any recent incidents of illness or injury just prior
to the activity. Supervision and protection should be adjusted to
anticipate any potential risks associated with individual health
conditions. For significant health conditions, the adult supervisor
should require an examination by a physician and consult with
parent, guardian, or caregiver for appropriate precautions.
3. SWIMMING ABILITY
For activity afloat, those not classified as a swimmer are limited
to multiperson craft during outings or float trips on calm water
with little likelihood of capsizing or falling overboard. They
may operate a fixed-seat rowboat or pedal boat accompanied by
a buddy who is a swimmer. They may paddle or ride in a canoe
or other paddle craft with an adult swimmer skilled in that craft
as a buddy. They may ride as part of a group on a motorboat or
sailboat operated by a skilled adult.
4. LIFE JACKETS
Properly fitted U.S. Coast Guard–approved life jackets must be
worn by all persons engaged in boating activity (rowing, canoe-
ing, sailing, boardsailing, motorboating, waterskiing, rafting,
tubing, and kayaking). Type III life jackets are recommended for
general recreational use.
5. BUDDY SYSTEM
All participants in an activity afloat are paired as buddies who
are always aware of each other’s situation and prepared to
sound an alarm and lend assistance immediately when needed.
When several craft are used on a float trip, each boat on the


WHITEWATER 11
.Safe Fun
water should have a “buddy boat.” All buddy pairs must be
accounted for at regular intervals during the activity and
checked off the water by the qualified supervisor at the conclu-
sion of the activity. Buddies either ride in the same boat or stay
near each other in single-person craft.
6. SKILL PROFICIENCY
Everyone in an activity afloat must have sufficient knowledge
and skill to participate safely. Passengers should know how
their movement affects boat stability and have a basic under-
standing of self-rescue. Boat operators must meet government
requirements, be able to maintain control of their craft, know
how changes in the environment influence that control, and
undertake activities only that are within their personal and
group capabilities.
• Content of training exercises should be appropriate for the
age, size, and experience of the participants, and should
cover basic skills on calm water of limited extent before
proceeding to advanced skills involving current, waves,
high winds or extended distance. At a minimum, instruc-
tors for canoes and kayaks should be able to demonstrate
the handling and rescue skills required for Scouting America
Aquatics Supervision: Paddle Craft Safety. All instructors
must have at least one assistant who can recognize and
respond appropriately if the instructor’s safety is compro-
mised.
• Self-guided unit trips on Class III whitewater may only be
done after all participants have received American Canoe
Association or equivalent training for the class of water and
type of craft involved. Unit trips on whitewater sections of
rivers rated Class IV are only allowed in rafts with a profes-
sionally trained guide in each raft. Trips above Class IV are
not allowed.
7. PLANNING
Proper planning is necessary to ensure a safe, enjoyable
exercise afloat. All plans should include a scheduled itinerary,
notification of appropriate parties, communication arrange-
ments, contingencies in case of foul weather or equipment
failure, and emergency response options.


12 WHITEWATER
Safe Fun.
Preparation. Any boating activity requires access to the proper
equipment and transportation of gear and participants to the
site. Determine what state and local regulations are applicable.
Get permission to use or cross private property. Determine
whether personal resources will be used or whether outfitters
will supply equipment, food, and shuttle services. Lists of group
and personal equipment and supplies must be compiled and
checked. Even short trips require selecting a route, checking
water levels, and determining alternative pull-out locations.
Changes in water level, especially on moving water, may pose
significant, variable safety concerns. Obtain current charts and
information about the waterway and consult those who have
traveled the route recently.
Float Plan. Complete the preparation by writing a detailed itin-
erary, or float plan, noting put-in and pull-out locations and
waypoints, along with the approximate time the group should
arrive at each. Travel time should be estimated generously.
Notification. File the float plan with parents, the local council
office if traveling on running water, and local authorities if
appropriate. Assign a member of the unit committee to alert
authorities if prearranged check-ins are overdue. Make sure
everyone is promptly notified when the trip is concluded.
Weather. Check the weather forecast just before setting out,
and keep an alert weather eye. Anticipate changes and bring all
craft ashore when rough weather threatens. Wait at least 30
minutes before resuming activities after the last incidence of
thunder or lightning.
Contingencies. Planning must identify possible emergencies
and other circumstances that could force a change of plans.
Develop alternative plans for each situation. Identify local emer-
gency resources such as EMS systems, sheriff’s departments, or
ranger stations. Check your primary communication system,
and identify backups, such as the nearest residence to a camp-
site. Cell phones and radios may lose coverage, run out of
power, or suffer water damage.
8. EQUIPMENT
All craft must be suitable for the activity, be seaworthy, and float
if capsized. All craft and equipment must meet regulatory stan-
dards, be properly sized, and be in good repair. Spares, repair
materials, and emergency gear must be carried as appropriate.


WHITEWATER 13
.Safe Fun
Life jackets and paddles must be sized to the participants.
Properly designed and fitted helmets must be worn when pad-
dling on rivers with rapids rated Class II or higher. Emergency
equipment such as throw bags, signal devices, flashlights, heat
sources, first-aid kits, radios, and maps must be ready for use.
Spare equipment, repair materials, extra food and water, and dry
clothes should be appropriate for the activity. All gear should be
stowed to prevent loss and water damage. For float trips with
multiple craft, the number of craft should be sufficient to carry
the party if a boat is disabled, and critical supplies should be
divided among the craft.
9. DISCIPLINE
Rules are effective only when followed. All participants should
know, understand, and respect the rules and procedures for safe
boating activities provided by Safety Afloat guidelines.
Applicable rules should be discussed prior to the outing and
reviewed for all participants near the boarding area just before
the activity afloat begins. People are more likely to follow direc-
tions when they know the reasons for rules and procedures.
Consistent, impartially applied rules supported by skill and good
judgment provide steppingstones to a safe, enjoyable outing.
American Whitewater Safety Guidelines
Whitewater activities present new opportunities for adventure,
but they also pose some additional risks that you should under-
stand and take precautions to avoid. The following guidelines,
adapted from the American Whitewater Safety Code for
Personal Preparedness and Responsibility, are geared especially
for Scouting-related whitewater activities and are an excellent
supplement to the Safety Afloat guidelines. Together these sets
of guidelines will help ensure that your outings will be both
safe and enjoyable.
1. BE A COMPETENT SWIMMER.
Being a safe whitewater boater does not require Olympian
swimming skills, but you should be comfortable and competent
in the water and be able to handle yourself underwater.
2. WEAR A LIFE JACKET.


14 WHITEWATER
Safe Fun.
A properly fitted vest-type life jacket offers back and shoulder
protection as well as the flotation needed to swim safely
in whitewater.
3. WEAR A SOLID, CORRECTLY FITTED HELMET.
A helmet is essential in kayaks or covered canoes and is recom-
mended for open canoeists using thigh straps and rafters run-
ning steep drops.
4. DO NOT BOAT OUT OF CONTROL.
Your skills should be sufficiently developed to enable you to
stop or get to shore before reaching danger. Do not enter a
rapid unless you are reasonably sure that you can run it safely
or swim it without injury.
5. BE AWARE OF RIVER HAZARDS.
Whitewater rivers present many hazards, such as high water or
very cold water, strainers (brush or trees in the water), dams,
ledges, holes, undercut rocks, or places where broaching (hit-
ting an obstacle broadside) is likely. If you do not think you can
boat around a hazard, get out and walk.
6. AVOID BROACHING.
When a boat is pushed sideways against a rock by strong cur-
rent, it may collapse and wrap. Broaching is especially danger-
ous to kayak and decked canoe paddlers; these boats will col-
lapse and the combination of indestructible hulls and tight out-
fitting may create a deadly trap. To avoid broaching, throw your
weight downstream toward the rock. This allows the current to
slide harmlessly underneath the hull.
7. AVOID BOATING ALONE.
The recommended minimum party is three people in at least
two craft.
For more information about whitewater safety and to view the complete
American Whitewater Safety Code, visit (with your parent’s permission)
www.americanwhitewater.org.


WHITEWATER 15
.Safe Fun
8. KNOW THE LIMITS OF YOUR BOATING ABILITY.
Do not attempt rivers or rapids that require paddling skills
more advanced than you possess.
9. BE IN GOOD PHYSICAL AND MENTAL CONDITION.
Physical and mental skills should be consistent with the diffi-
culties expected. Make adjustments for loss of skills due to age,
health, or fitness.
10. BE PRACTICED IN SELF-RESCUE.
Learn and practice self-rescue techniques such as recovering
from a capsize.
11. BE TRAINED IN RESCUE SKILLS.
Be able to perform CPR and first aid, including being able to
recognize and treat hypothermia.
12. BE SUITABLY EQUIPPED AND PREPARED
FOR EMERGENCIES.
• Wear shoes that will protect your feet.
• Carry a throw rope, knife, whistle, and waterproof matches.
• Tie your glasses on.
• Bring duct tape on short runs and a full repair kit on
isolated rivers.
• Do not wear bulky clothing that could get waterlogged
and hinder your ability to swim.
13. BE RESPONSIBLE FOR YOUR OWN SAFETY.
• Make thoughtful and responsible decisions about whether
to participate in a trip.
• Choose appropriate equipment.
• Scout all rapids first and use your best judgment to decide
whether to run or portage.
• Evaluate your own and your group’s safety on an ongo-
ing basis. Speak with anyone whose actions on the water
are dangerous, whether the person is a part of your
group or not.


16 WHITEWATER
Safe Fun.
Check over your
life jacket every
year. Sun, sand,
water, and age
all take a toll on
life jackets. Look
for frayed fabric,
broken or missing
buckles, and
poorly functioning
zippers. Do not
attempt to repair
tears or rips in the
material. Replace
your life jacket
if you have any
doubt about its
integrity or ability
to keep you afloat.
Safety on the Water
Whenever you participate in whitewater activities, you should
carry adequate safety equipment and be prepared to help out in
a rescue or to perform first aid. You must be aware of safety
considerations at all times and be completely alert. Do not go
afloat if you are fatigued. Be sure also that your whitewater
partner and those in your buddy boats are fully alert, sober,
and responsible.
Life Jackets and Whistles
Your life jacket is your most important piece of safety
equipment. If you go overboard, the support from your life
jacket will allow you to concentrate on righting the boat and
getting back underway. In an emergency situation, it might
keep an unconscious paddler afloat until help arrives. In short,
wearing a properly fitted life jacket helps minimize risk and
saves lives.
You should wear a life jacket every time you paddle, wheth-
er on a peaceful lake, a slow-moving stream, or a whitewater
river. Attach a loud whistle to your life jacket (using a very short
cord or lanyard) so that you can sound it instantly, should you
need help. Do not, however, tie it to the zipper where currents
could catch it and inadvertently open your life jacket.
Make sure your life jacket fits correctly. To check the fit on
dry land, put it on and tighten it until it is snug but not uncom-
fortable. Zip all zippers, buckle all buckles, tie all ties, and
clinch up all side straps. Have a buddy stand behind you, grasp
the material covering each shoulder, and try to pull it up
straight. If the life jacket can be pulled up to ear level, readjust
it. You may need to try a different style or size for a better fit.
The best test is to check the fit in calm water over your head.
Enter the water and relax your body while tilting your head
back. Your life jacket should keep your chin well above the
water. If it does not, readjust your life jacket, try a different
style (one that floats you higher in the water), or use one with
a higher buoyancy rating (read the label).


WHITEWATER 17
.Safe Fun
U.S. Coast Guard–Approved Life Jackets
The following are brief descriptions of the five U.S. Coast Guard–
approved life jackets. For recreational whitewater activities, Type III life
jackets generally are worn.
The Type I life jacket is an offshore life jacket that provides enough
flotation in the chest, shoulders, and upper back areas to turn most
unconscious victims faceup in rough, open water. Type I life jackets are
not designed for recreational paddling, but they are suitable for passen-
gers on cruising vessels on large bodies of water.
The Type II life jacket is a near-shore buoyant vest that places all the flo-
tation in the front and around the neck. Shaped like a horse collar and less
bulky than Type I life jackets, Type II life jackets may help keep an uncon-
scious victim faceup in calm,
inland waters. It will not pre-
vent an unconscious person
from floating facedown. Type II
life jackets are OK for short
periods of recreational boating
but are too uncomfortable to
use for paddling trips.
Type III life jackets most
often are used for water
sports such as waterskiing,
fishing, kayaking, and canoe-
ing. The Type III life jacket is designed to keep a conscious person floating
in a vertical position. It will not prevent an unconscious person from
floating facedown. Generally, Type III life jackets have a zipper or buckle
closure, and they may include adjustable side straps. They are comfort-
able and have a similar buoyancy as Type II life jackets.
The Type IV device (a circular ring, ring buoy, or seat cushion with
straps used for throwing) is designed to be tossed to a person in the water.
A Type IV device should never be used in place of a wearable life jacket.
The Type V life jacket is for special use only. A life jacket designed for
commercial whitewater rafting with extra flotation and a buoyant collar is
one example of a Type V life jacket. Other Type V life jackets, such as a res-
cue vest with a quick-release harness built into it, should be used only by
someone who has had special training.


18 WHITEWATER
Safe Fun.
Throw-Rope Care.
If a throw rope
gets wet, hang
it between two
points until it is
dry. Repack the
rope in its bag.
Store it away from
heat and bright
sunlight. At least
once a season,
inspect your
throw rope inch
by inch. Check
that it is uncut,
supple, and clean.
A friend’s life may
depend upon
it someday.
Helmets
A helmet is essential for whitewater canoeing and kayaking.
A helmet will help protect your head from blows from rocks,
paddles, or other boats or boaters. Whitewater helmets come in a
variety of shapes and sizes. The helmet should protect your fore-
head, temple, and back of your head. It should sit no higher than
the width of two fingers above your eyebrows to protect the fore-
head and should cover the ears to protect the temple area.
When sized and fitted properly, the helmet should be snug
without any areas where it feels loose but should not be so tight
that it feels uncomfortable. Helmets usually come with different
size foam inserts that allow the paddler to customize the fit. The
chin strap should be adjusted so that the strap cannot be pushed
up and over the chin but rather stays under the jaw. There
should not be a gap of more than the width of two fingers
between the strap and the jaw.
To check the fit, shake your head from side to side and up
and down. The helmet should remain in place without any slip-
page. Then with your fingers, push the front of the helmet up
and back. If fitted correctly, the head and helmet will move
together as one.
Helmets should always be worn while paddling on rivers
that are Class II and above. This is especially important when
paddling a kayak with a spray skirt or a canoe with thigh straps.
While scouting or standing on shore, helmets should remain on
if you are within 10 feet of the water’s edge.
Throw Ropes
Your life jacket and helmet will help keep you safe should you
flip, but an accurately thrown rescue rope can quickly pull
you to safety. Throw ropes are soft floating lines approximately
60 to 70 feet in length and 5
⁄16 inch or 3
⁄8 inch in diameter. They
often are made of polypropylene, a relatively inexpensive syn-
thetic fiber that is strong enough to haul in swimmers.
Polyethylene-based rope also works very well for this purpose,
although it is somewhat more costly.
Throw ropes come in a nylon bag with, typically, a disk
of closed-cell foam in the bag’s end. Because the ropes float, a
swimmer can easily grab them. Avoid using nylon ropes because
they sink and could become a potential entrapment hazard for
other paddlers. (See “Rescue Techniques” for a discussion of
how to use a throw rope to rescue swimmers.)


WHITEWATER 19
.Safe Fun
First Aid
Although there is much you can do to avoid accidents and inju-
ries while out on the river, you should always be properly pre-
pared to deal with them should they occur. On every river trip,
carry an easily accessible waterproof first-aid kit. The
longer your trip and the farther you are from civilization, the
more extensive your kit should be. Always take a personal first-
aid kit to cover your own needs. On group outings, a patrol
first-aid kit should be sufficient. Consult the First Aid merit
badge pamphlet or the Fieldbook for kit contents.
Because whitewater paddling is a physical activity that takes
place in the outdoors, participants are at risk for a range of inju-
ries. Following the nine points of Safety Afloat will eliminate any
serious risks in whitewater activities, but some minor injuries
still might occur. Take appropriate precautions to be prepared for
such occurrences.
Cold Water–Related Illnesses
There are two primary dangers from falling into cold water.
Depending on the water temperature, a paddler can experience
cold-water shock. This can happen in water as warm as 70
degrees. The second danger is hypothermia. This is a gradual
lowering of the body’s core temperature over minutes to hours
in water cooler than 80 degrees.
Cold-water shock occurs when a paddler falls into very cold
water, especially below 60 degrees. The colder the water, the
more rapid the onset and the more severe the effects. The body’s
response to cold water is involuntary and cannot be controlled by
the victim.
The first response is a loss of breath control. Initially the
paddler will reflexively take a deep, gasping breath, which is
dangerous if the paddler is underwater. Wearing a life jacket
could save the paddler’s life in this case. Next the paddler will
start taking many quick, short breaths—as many as three to
If either the
air or water
temperature is
below 70 degrees,
paddlers should
have thermal
protection.
Dehydration can occur at any temperature if a person is sweating
profusely and/or not drinking enough liquids. Avoid dehydration
by drinking plenty of fluids and eating enough throughout the day.
On a hot day, if someone in your group becomes weary or con-
fused, or develops a headache or body aches, have the person rest
in the shade and sip water until the symptoms subside.


20 WHITEWATER
Safe Fun.
four times the normal rate—as if panting for air. This can make
the person light-headed and dizzy and feeling as if he or she is
suffocating. It will also prevent the victim from holding his or
her breath, which makes normal swimming impossible. These
effects on breathing can last for minutes, making self-rescue
very difficult.
The paddler’s heart rate and blood pressure will go up
quickly, increasing the risk of stroke and heart attack. Cold-water
shock is also extremely painful with severe pain and cramping of
the hands, arms, legs, and feet. However, within minutes, the
pain will be replaced by numbness. The brain is also affected,
and the paddler may experience fear or panic and be unable to
think clearly or follow simple instructions.
In very cold water, the body will quickly reduce blood flow
to the muscles of the arms and legs. Without blood, there is a
rapid loss of muscle strength and nerve control. This incapacita-
tion can happen very quickly, even in less than a minute. Once
paddlers lose the use of their hands, arms, and legs, their ability
to self-rescue or cooperate with rescuers is lost.
During the first minute of cold-water shock, the paddler
should focus on staying afloat and breathing as normal as possi-
ble. In extremely cold water, the paddler will have very little time
to perform self-rescue before muscle paralysis sets in, making it
impossible to swim or reenter a boat.
The only treatment for cold-water shock is to rapidly remove
the paddler from the water. The victim has at most 10 minutes
before all of the effects of cold-water shock take effect. Once
removed from the water, the victim will need to be treated for
hypothermia. Take great care when paddling in very cold waters.
The best prevention for cold-water shock and related injuries is
to dress appropriately for the weather and stay dry. Use of a wet-
suit or dry suit can be lifesaving.
Hypothermia occurs when the body’s core temperature falls
below the normal range. Exposure to cold, or even cool, water
can lower the core temperature dangerously. Early signs of heat
loss include bluish lips and shivering, followed by a loss of judg-
ment and the inability to do simple tasks. Further chilling can
lead to unconsciousness and, eventually, death.
Treatment for hypothermia involves carefully removing the
person from the water, removing wet clothing, and drying him or
her. Warm the person by putting warm, dry clothes on him or
her and wrapping in blankets. Pay special attention to covering
the head, as most heat loss occurs from the head. Warm the per-
Earning the First
Aid merit badge
provides an
excellent start
in preparing
for medical
emergencies
on land or on
the water.


WHITEWATER 21
.Safe Fun
son’s trunk first, not the hands and feet as this can cause shock.
If using hot-water bottles or chemical hot packs, wrap them in
cloth; don’t apply them directly to the skin. Place the heating
sources on the chest, neck, and groin. Avoid rough handling or
jerking of the person, especially if the person is lethargic or
unconscious. This may cause the heart to develop life-threatening
irregular rhythms. If conscious, give the person a warm drink.
Avoid caffeine and alcohol. Once the body temperature begins to
rise, keep the person dry and wrapped in a warm blanket. Cover
the person’s head and neck as well. Avoid rapid rewarming as it,
too, can induce fatal heart rhythms.
Heat-Related Illnesses
High temperatures can pose as much of a safety threat as low
temperatures. Heat-related illnesses range from having flu-like
symptoms to life-threatening hyperthermia. Heat-related illness-
es result when the body cannot keep itself cool enough. One
way the body can cool itself is by losing heat to either the air or
water around it. As the air or water temperature outside the
body approaches the body’s normal temperature of 98 degrees
Fahrenheit, the harder it is for the body to lose heat. When the
surrounding temperatures are above normal body temperature,
the body will begin to absorb heat. An important way that the
body loses heat is through sweating. As the water in sweat
evaporates from the skin, the process uses energy and lowers
body temperature. However, if a person is dehydrated and can-
not sweat or the air is already saturated with water so there is
no room in the air for more water, the risks of heat-related ill-
nesses go up dramatically.
If someone feels dizzy, faint, nauseated, or weak; develops a
headache or muscle cramps; or looks pale and is sweating heavi-
ly, treat for heat exhaustion. Have the person rest in a cool,
shady spot. Loosen or remove clothing to promote heat loss. Wet
the skin with a damp cloth and then fan to promote cooling
through evaporation. Have the victim sip water containing a
pinch of table salt; sip water while eating a salty snack; or sip a
diluted sports drink. Gently massage and stretch cramped mus-
cles. If the condition worsens, get medical help. Recovery should
be rapid but may take up to 24 hours.
Heatstroke can be caused by dehydration (water loss), over-
exercising, or both when there is a high heat index. The victim
may be wet or dry but always will be flushed and hot. The pulse
will be extremely rapid, and the person may be disoriented or
A body tempera-
ture at or greater
than 106 degrees
Fahrenheit is a
life-threatening
medical condi-
tion and requires
immediate medi-
cal treatment by
healthcare
professionals.


22 WHITEWATER
Safe Fun.
unconscious. Cool the victim immediately through immersion
with cold packs in the groin area and armpits. Increase the
body’s fluid level by having a conscious victim sip water. Seek
emergency help immediately.
Sunburn is an inflammation of the skin caused by too
much exposure to the sun. When sunlight reflects off the water
surface, it increases the chance of being burned, so it is espe-
cially important for paddlers to cover up, use a waterproof sun-
screen with a sun protection factor (SPF) of at least 15 every
two hours, and limit exposure time.
Shoulder Dislocations
Shoulder dislocations are one of the most serious injuries asso-
ciated with whitewater activities. A shoulder becomes dislocated
when the ball at the end of the upper arm bone slips out of the
socket at the shoulder. This can happen when a paddler
attempts a maneuver such as a high brace that involves reach-
ing overhead to gain leverage with the paddle. Any stroke or
maneuver in which the arm is fully extended and then rotated
rearward so the elbow is behind the shoulder puts the shoulder
joint in a vulnerable position. You can reduce the likelihood
of such an injury by making sure you keep a slight bend in
your elbows and by keeping your grip or upper hand no higher
than your forehead.
If someone in your party should suffer a shoulder disloca-
tion, put a sling on the arm and immobilize the area above and
below the joint as for a collarbone fracture. Before applying the
sling, place a pad between the arm and chest. Do not move the
joint or attempt to put the arm bone back in the socket. Take
measures to prevent the person from going into shock. Get the
victim to medical attention as quickly as possible.
Minor Injuries
Paddlers can get insect bites or stings while afloat or when
preparing to launch from the shore. The best strategies for
avoiding stings and bites are to use insect repellent and wear
long-sleeved shirts and long pants when in buggy areas. For
typical insect stings and bites, apply first aid as described in
your Scouts BSA handbook. For severe and prolonged pain, or
any severe reaction, dizziness, or respiratory distress, get
medical help.


WHITEWATER 23
.Safe Fun
Bruises are injuries that cause bleeding under the skin.
Applying an ice pack to a bruise will reduce pain and swelling.
Minor wounds, such as cuts, should be washed carefully with
soap and water and covered with a sterile bandage or dressing
to prevent infection. Deeper cuts or puncture wounds may need
stitches, antibiotics, and a tetanus shot to prevent infection. For
these injuries, visit a doctor as soon as possible.
Blisters form when skin is irritated, usually by friction or
heat. A hot spot signals the beginning of a blister. Stop imme-
diately and protect the tender area by cutting a piece of mole-
skin or molefoam and covering the affected area. If a blister
forms, build up several layers of moleskin or molefoam, as
needed, to take off the pressure. Blisters are best left unbroken.
Treat a broken blister as you would a minor cut.
Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) is a procedure used
on someone whose breathing and heartbeat have stopped.
It is only for extreme emergencies. CPR is required only when
someone has no pulse, indicating that the heart has stopped
beating. Someone’s heart may stop in the event of a heart attack
or drowning. CPR includes both chest compressions and rescue
breathing (mouth-to-mouth resuscitation). The procedure pro-
vides the blood circulation and breathing that could save the
victim’s life. CPR should not be performed on someone who
has a pulse but is simply unconscious. A drowning victim may
stop breathing but could still have a pulse. In this case, rescue
breathing, not CPR, is the correct procedure to follow.
CPR courses are designed to teach rescuers how to
recognize life-threatening conditions and respond
appropriately. Check with the American Red Cross,
the American Heart Association, and other similar
organizations in your area to find out if they offer
CPR and other first-aid training. Every river trip
should include one or more persons with current
CPR training. You need to know CPR before you
have to use it.





WHITEWATER 25
.Reading a River
Reading a River
Before you set foot in your boat, take the time to learn as
much as you can about the stretch of river you will be running.
Find out about the river’s unique features and hazards and
identify what class of rapids you will be dealing with. If possi-
ble, scout your route to avoid unpleasant and potentially
dangerous surprises.
River Features
The term whitewater refers to a stretch of swiftly moving water
that becomes white and foamy as it passes over or around
obstacles. A rapid is a turbulent, fast-flowing stretch of river
that contains obstructions above or below the water. Rapids
may feature drops in which the water abruptly descends over
rocks or a ledge.
Current describes the continuous movement of water in
a certain direction. The strength of the current is affected by
three things: gradient, flow, and depth. The steeper the gradient
(or slope of riverbed) and the higher the volume of flow, the
more powerful the current.
Water in a river flows in different layers at different
speeds. In straight channels, the layers just beneath the surface
and in the middle of the river flow faster than the layers on the
bottom or on the sides because there is less friction with the
air than there is with the river bottom or banks. As the river-
bed widens and the water becomes less deep, the current
slows and shallows (shallow areas) develop.
When scouting a
river, be sure to
wear your helmet.


26 WHITEWATER
Reading a River.
When a river turns, it forms a bend. The strongest,
deepest, and fastest current will usually be found on the
outside of bends. You usually will find the biggest waves on
the outside of the curve, and the smallest waves, called riffles,
running on the inside. Here the water is the slowest as it
passes over sand or gravel bars.
The beds of most whitewater rivers are littered with rocks,
but when a paddler talks about rocks, he or she usually is
referring to rocks jutting above the river’s surface. Logs and
trees just below the surface are called sleepers.
The amount of
water flowing
downstream
changes
seasonally, daily,
and sometimes
hourly. A river’s
flow is measured
in cubic feet per
second (CFS).
Speed of currents in a straight river
Speed of currents in a river bend
CHANNEL
SLOWEST SLOWESTFASTEST
SLOWER
CHANNEL
OUTSIDE
BEND
INSIDE
BEND
FASTEST SLOWEST
INSIDE EDGE
SLOW AND
SHALLOW
OUTSIDE EDGE
FAST AND DEEP


WHITEWATER 27
.Reading a River
Ledges are rock shelves that extend from the bank into the
river or are submerged. A series of ledges can form a stair-step
rapid. Big ledges can create falls, or a drop where water free-falls
at least part of the way. Ledges usually warrant a look-see
before running.
An upstream V is formed as water meets an object and
flows around it. The point of the V, or apex, starts where the
current strikes the object and the wide part of the V forms
downstream as water flows around the object on each side.
A downstream V forms when current flows between two
obstructions, such as midstream rocks or the walls of a narrow
canyon. A downstream V’s wide end faces upstream and its
apex, or narrow end, faces downstream. It is formed from the
sides of two upstream V’s as the sides intersect downstream.
Steep diagonal waves usually define the sides of the V, forcing
boaters to the middle of the V, where the fastest current and
deepest water are found. Running the downstream V can be
the easiest route through a rapid, but huge waves can form at
the bottom of the V. These waves can fill a canoe with water
or flip a boat. Canoes with flotation bags can minimize the
amount of water sloshing about in the boat.
Upstream and Downstream V’s
DOWNSTREAM V
UPSTREAM V
UPSTREAM V


28 WHITEWATER
Reading a River.
Eddies are relatively calm waters where the main current
reverses its flow. They are found downstream of rocks, bridge
pilings, jutting cliff faces, and so forth. As the current flows
around a rock or other natural or artificial structure, it parts
left and right, leaving a hollow area immediately behind the
rock. The water behind the obstacle is lower than the water
on either side, so water flows back upstream to fill the hole,
running counter to the river’s main current. Eddies may be
several hundred feet across behind a point of land or as
small as a dinner plate behind a rock.
To tell the
difference
between eddies
and holes,
remember this:
Water flows
into eddies and
then out again
at the surface.
Water flows into
holes, recirculates
for a while, then
flows out along
the river bottom.
An eddy can form on the downstream side of a boulder.
EDDY LINE
EDDY
SMALL TURBULENCE
DOWNSTREAM
TAIL
Shallow currents flow over an obstacle to create a hole on
the downstream side.


WHITEWATER 29
.Reading a River
Eddy lines are the often-visible lines where the down-
stream current rubs up against an eddy’s upstream current.
This forms a ridge in the water that tapers from high to low
the farther downstream you move in the eddy.
Holes are areas behind obstacles where a trough forms,
followed by a wave that curls back toward the hole. Recirculating
holes are extremely dangerous holes that form over an obstruc-
tion or following a sudden drop in the riverbed, with most of
their water recirculating instead of flowing back into the river
downstream of the obstruction. In a recirculating hole, water
flows in from all sides and flows out along the river bottom.
Recirculating holes usually feature violent, aerated water and
powerful tumbling current.
Waves are stationary ridges of water. Sometimes at the
bottom of a rapid, waves form a series of standing waves called
a wave train. This line of waves forms, one wave following
another and gradually decreasing in size, until the falling
water dissipates its energy.
River Hazards
Recirculating holes and riverwide waves can be created by
artificial structures such as weirs or low-head dams. Low-
head dams (usually made of concrete or rock rubble) often
stretch from bank to bank, typically without a break for the
current to flow through. Instead, the river falls evenly over
the structure, forming an often lethal, unbroken wave.
Standing waves
can be fun to ride.
You will feel as
if the river is
standing still
and your boat is
being raised and
lowered like a
yo-yo. At other
times, standing
waves can be
steep enough
to overturn or
fill boats.
STANDING
WAVES
Deeper currents flow over the obstacle to form standing
waves farther downstream.


30 WHITEWATER
Reading a River.
Never run drops formed by low-head dams or weirs.
They are aptly called “drowning machines.” Their symmetry
forms a very dangerous recirculating hole with no defined
downstream flow and no opportunity to escape downstream
or to the side. Many times they are marked on maps. Identify
each one during trip planning and make sure each can be and
is safely portaged.
Also be on the lookout when you are out on the water
for low-head dams or waterfalls that are not marked on maps.
They often give themselves away by revealing an unbroken
horizon line. A horizon line is formed when the river steepens
and the rapid or falls formed by this sudden drop is below
your sight line, thus marking a steep drop, a falls, or a low-
head dam. Always stop and scout drops with horizon lines.
Horizon lines frequently indicate a mandatory portage.
If you find your boat going sideways down the river
and you are approaching an obstacle like a large rock in this
position, try to avoid broaching. Broaching occurs when your
boat is sideways to the current and gets pushed up against an
obstacle. Broaching can be dangerous, especially for beginners,
and is best avoided. Vertical pinning occurs when the boat goes
over a steep drop and the bow sticks in the river bed below,
usually jammed between rocks.
If you begin to broach, lean toward the obstacle and allow
the current to flow underneath and around the hull. If you lean
upstream, away from the obstacle, the current will usually flip
Horizon lines appear as an unbroken line, often stretching from bank to bank.
You will see the river running up to this line, then disappearing, to become visible
a distance downstream.
HORIZON LINE


WHITEWATER 31
.Reading a River
the boat upstream. If you are in a canoe,
the water will fill the boat like a big tub. If
you are in a kayak, water will tend to push
the boat down, deeper into the water, entrapping you inside.
If it looks like you are going to pin, get out of your boat—
fast—and onto the obstacle.
The best way to avoid broaching is to keep the boat
pointed downstream. It is better to hit a rock straight on
with the bow than to try to turn in the current and end up
going sideways.
Undercut rocks are rocks that have been eroded under
water. They often are invisible from the surface and can
entrap boats. They are very dangerous and can be fatal.
Avoid undercut rocks by boating or portaging around drops
with undercut rocks.
Strainers are obstacles that come in many guises but
always spell big trouble. Tree limbs (also called sweepers)
are a common type of strainer.
They comb the current—stopping
boats and boaters while allowing
the current to flow cleanly
through. Downed trees or roots
also snare unwary boaters.
Artificial strainers such as
fencing, old cables or pipes,
and chunks of concrete and
rebar form severe hazards on
some rivers. Portage around any
strainer that you are not confident
you can safely pass.
Avoid getting any part of your body
between your boat and an obstacle
if your boat broaches. Not only can
the current’s force wrap boats, but it
can entrap paddlers, sometimes with
fatal consequences.
Low-hanging tree branches often create strainers.
Broaching


32 WHITEWATER
Reading a River.
When in Doubt, Scout!
Before running a section of whitewater, a blind corner, or a
potential drop of any sort, land your boat and scout ahead
along the shore to make sure that there are no upcoming
obstacles that might be beyond your ability to navigate.
When scouting a river, it is important that everyone
use the same terms to describe what they see. Downstream
describes the direction in which the current is flowing toward
the mouth of the river, and upstream describes the direction
opposite the general flow of the current. River right and river
left always refer to the right side or the left side of the river as
if you were facing downstream.
Scouting ahead helps you choose the safest route through
rough water. Start planning your run at the downstream end
and work your way back upstream. First know where you
want to end up, then figure out if and how you can get there
safely. Look things over to identify hazards, and discuss them
with your buddies.
Note landmarks that might help you know when to begin
that critical midrapid move. While walking back to your boat,
stop several times to squat down and look back downstream.
Try to imagine how things will look from water level. Break
your run into sections. By doing so, you can break down an
imposing stretch of foam and spray into a series of planned
maneuvers. Identify several options to use in case your run
does not go according to your original plan.
Rivers change from one day to the next. You need to
know what is around the next bend or over the next
drop. Normal erosion, floods, fallen trees, and new
fences may transform overnight a safe route into a
hazardous one. Remember that water levels rise and
fall with the seasons and after rains. Sudden dam
releases may lower or raise water levels drastically,
dramatically changing a river’s character. Don’t take
anything for granted.
The time of year,
fallen trees, and
rainfall are just
several elements
that can transform
a normally safe
route into a
dangerous one.
Always scout
ahead, plan your
run, and identify
several options
in case your
run does not go
as planned.


WHITEWATER 33
.Reading a River
International Scale of River Difficulty
The International Scale of River Difficulty provides a standard-
ized classification system for rating the difficulty and risks in
running rapids. River runners use the scale as a rough but use-
ful means of comparing the difficulty of one river with another.
As a beginner, your paddling will be in Class I and Class II
whitewater so that you can build skills in water where you can
have fun with relatively low risk. In addition, you can develop
new skills safely by practicing difficult moves in easy rapids.
The scale (from Class I through the extreme Class VI) is
useful only if you understand your own capabilities and limita-
tions and those of your companions. Although Class I and II
rapids are good choices for beginners, you may find yourself
deciding to run a rapid you portaged last time or portaging a
rapid you ran previously. For instance, cold or high water can
raise a rapid’s difficulty by one or more levels.
In addition, you should consider a river’s rating to be one
class higher if the sum of the temperature of the water and air
totals less than 120 degrees or if the trip is on a remote river.
As you gain experience, you will learn to exercise progressively
sophisticated judgment about both the river and yourself.
Always choose safety and common sense when in doubt.


34 WHITEWATER
Reading a River.
International Scale of River Difficulty
Here are the six classifications used for the International Scale of
River Difficulty.
Class III: Rapids with moderate, irregular waves that may swamp an open canoe.
Complex maneuvering is often required. Some risk to swimmers; group assistance
may be necessary.
Class II: Straightforward rapids with wide, clear channels. Some maneuvering
may be required, but rocks and medium-size waves are easily avoided by trained
paddlers. Swimmers are seldom at risk.
Class I: Fast-moving water with riffles and small waves. Few or no obstructions.
Risk to swimmers is slight; self-rescue is easy.


WHITEWATER 35
.Reading a River
Class VI: These runs have almost never been attempted because they are
extremely difficult, unpredictable, and dangerous. The consequences of errors
are very severe and rescue may be impossible. Only teams of experts who
have taken every precaution should attempt them, and only when water levels
are favorable.
Class IV: Powerful, but predictable, rapids requiring precise boat handling in
turbulent water. May feature large, unavoidable waves and holes or narrow
passages demanding fast maneuvers. Risk to swimmers is moderate to high;
self-rescue may be difficult and group assistance is often necessary.
Class V: Extremely long, obstructed, or very violent rapids. Drops may feature
large, unavoidable waves and holes or steep, congested chutes with complex,
demanding routes. Eddies may be turbulent or difficult to reach. Swims are
dangerous, and rescue is often difficult, even for experts.





WHITEWATER 37
.Boats, Paddles, and Other Equipment
Boats, Paddles,
and Other Equipment
Canoes and kayaks designed for whitewater are more sturdily
built than those designed for flatwater. They are designed to
bounce or slide off rocks, to turn quickly, and to be forgiving
in turbulent water.
Boat Materials
Most whitewater canoes and kayaks are made of plastic,
plastic-foam composites, or Kevlar® and carbon-fiber compos-
ites. Aluminum canoes and fiberglass canoes and kayaks were
once the most popular boats for whitewater. They have been
replaced by modern plastic boats but still remain very common
for trips on moving water without rapids. Each material has
advantages and disadvantages. When selecting a boat, you will
need to consider expense, your skill level, and how well the
boat material will stand up to the type of river running you
will be doing.
Decked Canoes
Solo and tandem covered canoes, called C-1s and
C-2s, are a treat to watch as they run heavy white
water or slip through slalom gates. Like kayaks, pad-
dlers in C-boats are decked, so paddlers wear spray
skirts that allow them to stay dry in big waves and to
play in holes. C-boat paddlers kneel on a pedestal
rather than sit in a seat, and they use a single paddle.


38 WHITEWATER
Boats, Paddles, and Other Equipment.
The table here lists some common canoe and kayak materials
and lists the advantages and disadvantages of each.
Whitewater Canoe and Kayak Materials
Hull Material Advantages Disadvantages
ABS Royalex™
(acrylonitrile butadiene
styrene), cross-linked
vinyl, ABS plastic, and
ABS closed-cell foam
sandwiched together
Strong; flexes instead
of breaks; quiet, repair-
able, moderately priced;
the most common mate-
rial used to build white-
water canoes
Heavy; dents and
scratches easily; some-
times too flexible; cannot
be shaped into fine bows
and sterns; repairs can
be difficult; heavier than
fiberglass or Kevlar®
Polyethylene (plastic or
plastic and foam, injected
or molded in a form)
Flexes instead of breaks;
quiet; least expensive;
the most common mate-
rial used to build kayaks
Very difficult to outfit
and repair; sometimes
too flexible; often
very heavy
Aluminum Strong and weather-
proof; less expensive
than some materials
Noisy; “sticks” to rocks;
not lightweight; cannot
be shaped into fine bows
and sterns; external keel
ill-suited for whitewater;
more difficult to outfit;
heavier than fiberglass
Fiberglass Strong; lighter than
ABS; can be formed into
sophisticated shapes;
stiff; easier to outfit and
repair; moderately priced
Less durable than ABS;
heavier than Kevlar®
;
few whitewater-specific
canoes and kayaks are
made of fiberglass
Kevlar®
/carbon fiber Very strong for its
weight; can be formed
into sophisticated shapes;
very stiff; relatively easy
to outfit and repair; often
used for competition and
elite whitewater canoes
and kayaks
Most expensive; less tol-
erant of abuse than ABS


WHITEWATER 39
.Boats, Paddles, and Other Equipment
Differences in Whitewater and Flatwater
Canoe Design
Whitewater solo canoes vary from 11 to 14 feet in length,
and are usually less than 30 inches wide. Tandem whitewater
canoes are 14 to 16 feet long and 32 to 36 inches wide. The
average whitewater canoe’s bow and stern are fuller than those
designed for flatwater or ocean touring. This aids buoyancy
and reduces the chance that the ends of the boat will get
buried in a wave.
Whitewater canoes are built with more rocker than flat-
water boats. Rocker is the term used to describe a boat’s
end-to-end profile. The bottom of the boat curves up, like a
banana, toward the front and back of the boat. This shape helps
whitewater canoes turn quickly. Flatwater boats have much less
rocker, which helps them track in a straight line.
Another way whitewater canoes differ from flatwater
canoes is that they often have higher sides to help keep out
waves. Some whitewater canoes are designed with tumblehome,
an inward curving of the upper section of the side of the canoe.
On well-designed whitewater boats, tumblehome does not
adversely affect the boat’s stability and makes it considerably
easier to paddle because the hand on the paddle shaft can be
kept closer to the boat.
Canoe rocker
NO ROCKER
MODERATE ROCKER
EXTREME ROCKER


40 WHITEWATER
Boats, Paddles, and Other Equipment.
Types of Kayaks
Most modern kayaks are made of rigid plastics such as polyeth-
ylene, fiberglass, or Kevlar®. Kayak designs vary according to
usage and construction. For example, a flatwater racer differs
from a whitewater racer. Recreational kayaks are multipurpose
craft suitable for a variety of water conditions. Touring kayaks
are larger and have storage capacity for camping gear. They are
also known as sea kayaks, due to their use around ocean
shorelines. These kayaks are built long—up to 20 feet—to aid
in tracking, and they often have a rudder, or skeg. Sit-on-top
kayaks do away with the traditional cockpit and deck in favor
of a recessed well that is self-bailing. Inflatable kayaks are
made of the same materials as whitewater rafts and are very
stable. Inflatables are open, like rafts, with the paddler sitting
on the floor of the boat.
Special play boats, also called rodeo kayaks, are used in
heavy whitewater. Some play boat designs are adapted for
surfing. They are only 6 to 9 feet long and 2 feet wide, with
low decks and hard chines (where the floor meets the sides).
Short boats are slow boats, but what they sacrifice in speed
they gain in maneuverability. Low decks make it easier to play
in holes; flat bottoms make it easier to spin; and hard chines
make carving turns and steering easier.
Kayak rocker
NO ROCKER
MODERATE ROCKER
EXTREME ROCKER
Install extra
flotation (air bags
or plastic foam)
in your whitewater
boat to ensure
your boat will ride
high in the water
if you flip.


WHITEWATER 41
.Boats, Paddles, and Other Equipment
Paddles
On every trip, you will lift your paddle thousands of times,
making a lightweight but sturdy paddle worth its weight in
gold. The best paddle shafts are indexed, or oval, not round.
An indexed shaft helps you control the boat and is easy on
your hands. Paddle blade shape is important as well. The best
whitewater paddles combine lightweight strength with shapes
that “stick” in the water, then move cleanly through the water.
Whitewater canoe paddles are made of wood, aluminum,
plastic, and composite materials, such as fiberglass, Kevlar®,
and carbon fiber. Most whitewater canoe paddles
feature a T-grip for better feedback and control.
Blades vary in size, but most have a medium-size
blade that is steady and predictable in the water.
The tip of the blade is often constructed with an
insert of a durable material such as aluminum
or polyurethane.
Kayak paddles have blades at both ends.
Usually the blades are set at an angle to each other
from 45 to 90 degrees. The offset angle allows the
paddle blade out of the water to be automatically
feathered. Feathering reduces the effect of wind
and wave on the blade. Shafts are indexed and
blades are oriented so that either your left or right
hand is the control hand. Your control hand con-
stantly grips the shaft while your noncontrol hand
allows the paddle to swivel and feather between
strokes. Some kayak paddles break into two shorter
pieces for storage and transport.
Kayak blades in profile can be either
flat or curved and either a simple oval or
a complex curved shape. Kayak paddle
faces can be flat or hollowed. Whitewater
kayak paddles are shorter and generally
more symmetrical than touring kayak paddles.
GRIP
SHAFT
THROAT
BLADE
TIP


42 WHITEWATER
Boats, Paddles, and Other Equipment.
Whitewater Rafts
Rafts are inflated watercraft that come in a variety of shapes
and sizes. Paddle rafts are paddled by a crew of paddlers,
while oar rafts are rowed by a single oarsperson. Most rafts are
10 to 16 feet long and oval. The hulls are made of inflatable
Outfitting
Most whitewater canoes and
kayaks feature special outfitting
to hold paddlers securely in
their boats. Foot braces, for
example, help both kayakers
and canoeists hold themselves
in their boats with their legs
and knees. Releasable thigh
straps keep canoeists from
falling out when the boat is
tipped or upside down.
In addition, most whitewater canoes are outfitted with rigid foam
or plastic pedestals (or “saddles”) on which paddlers kneel astride.
Pedestals offer much better control over a canoe and, by virtue of
being easier to tumble off of than bench seats, are safer in the event
of a capsize. Knee pads glued into a canoe keep paddlers from sliding
around and ease the discomfort of kneeling.
Kayakers pad their boat’s cockpit so that it will fit like a glove for
the purpose of control while on moving water. Most whitewater kayaks
include pillars or bulkheads made of foam to keep their decks from
collapsing should they broach. Pillars, usually placed fore and aft, brace
the floor and deck between kayakers’ legs or in front of their feet and
behind their boat’s seat.
All canoe and kayak outfitting must be installed with safety in mind.
Most outfitting is glued into boats with adhesives specifically designed
for the task; many are toxic. For this reason, find a qualified outfitter
who is an experienced whitewater paddler to help you make sure your
outfitting is functional, properly installed, and safe to use.


WHITEWATER 43
.Boats, Paddles, and Other Equipment
Every kayaking
party should have
at least one spare
paddle; every
canoe should
have one, too.
Canoeists’ spare
paddles should
be securely
fastened to their
boats, out of the
way, but readily
at hand in case
they are needed.
tubes about 14 to 20 inches in diameter. These tubes are made
of sturdy synthetic rubber or vinyl. Oared rafts are coupled to
an aluminum frame that holds gear, seats, and rowlocks. Most
modern whitewater rafts are self-bailing, that is, they feature
an inflated floor with drain holes that allow water to flow out
of the boat.
The size and weight of a whitewater raft make it a stable
and forgiving craft that is ideal for carrying gear. Because
whitewater rafts are big and heavy, they are slower and less
agile than are canoes or kayaks when it comes to catching
eddies, surfing, and playing in rapids.
Tubing
Tubing can be loads of fun, but there are many hazards to
consider. Inner tubes are difficult to steer and they offer
almost no protection in a collision. In addition, their inflation
valves and stems tend to cut and scratch their riders. When
tied together, tubes become a significant entrapment hazard.
This is why you should only go tubing on slow-moving water.
You must wear shoes and your life jacket. Take a buddy, and
make sure you follow the Scouting America Safety Afloat
guidelines.
Rafting Safety
Whitewater safety precautions for canoeing and kayaking apply to
rafting, too. If you are in a paddle raft, always wear a life jacket and
follow the other Scouting America Safety Afloat guidelines.
Rafting injuries are frequently caused by paddle contact. Remember
that you are riding beside another paddler, and there is another person
paddling close behind or in front of you. Keep the blade on the outside
of the craft, and grip the paddle low and close to your own body. If you
capsize or fall overboard while rafting, reach out to the side, grasp the
grab line, pull yourself out from under the raft, and move to the
upstream end.
Do not overlook the safety of others on the river. A six-person raft
plowing through the rapids can run over a kayak like a bus running
over a bicycle. Look ahead and be sure the rapids are clear when you
begin your run.





WHITEWATER 45
.Basic Whitewater Skills
Basic Whitewater Skills
If you are itching to become a great paddler, you need to
practice to perfect basic strokes and form so that you will
have the confidence and skill to meet the challenges of
whitewater paddling.
Body Mechanics and Position
It is important to be mindful of body mechanics and form
whether you are on flatwater or whitewater. Proper form will
keep you safer and ensure that you get the most out of the
effort you expend.
Always grip your paddle with your hands a little more
than shoulder-width apart and your paddle shaft perpendicular
to the water. Canoeists should keep one hand on their paddle’s
grip. When performing strokes like the cross draw, avoid letting
your upper paddle hand rise above your head—if your paddle
is yanked backward in strong current or if it strikes a rock, you
are vulnerable to dislocating your shoulder.
When paddling in a solo canoe or kayak, you are, of
course, solely responsible for powering and steering. Keep
your eyes on your target and make lots of small corrections.
Little corrections are easy and keep you moving along; big
corrections are harder and slow you down.
Tandem canoeists paddle on opposite sides. This helps
move the canoe in a straight line and provides tremendous
stability. The bow paddler provides power, initiates many
maneuvers, and provides stability. The stern paddler steers
the canoe with a combination of power and steering strokes.
On flatwater, the bow paddler usually follows the stern
paddler’s lead. On whitewater, however, the bow paddler might
have a clearer view of the river and so may direct the boat’s
path on the water. The best whitewater paddlers constantly com-
municate about where they want to go on the river.
Most of your
paddling power
comes from your
torso—from
coiling and
uncoiling the
large muscles
of your back,
stomach, and
shoulders.


46 WHITEWATER
Basic Whitewater Skills.
In a tandem canoe, the stern paddler’s forward strokes will
have more effect on the canoe’s direction than will those of the
bow paddler, and will usually cause the boat to turn away
from the stern paddler’s selected paddling side. The same is
true when paddling solo: The forward stroke commonly turns
the canoe to the paddler’s offside. Efficient stern and
solo paddling include a steering component at the end of each
stroke. There are many different steering strokes (J-stroke,
C-stroke, Canadian stroke), but to begin with, canoeists
should focus on developing a dependable J-stroke.
Recall that all strokes can be divided into the following
three phases:
• Catch—In this position, the paddle blade has entered the
water and the paddle shaft is perpendicular. The force of the
blade applied by the paddler against the water is now equal
to the water’s resistance. The paddler feels the paddle “grab”
the water.
• Power—The torso uncoils, delivering the power of the
muscles of the upper body to the blade through the shaft.
• Recovery—The stroke has ended and now the blade is
lifted out of the water, and set up for another stroke in the
catch position.
Whitewater Paddle Strokes
Practice whitewater paddle strokes and maneuvers on flatwater
or on a slow-moving river. Practice slowly, working first toward
precision and later adding power and speed.
The Cross Forward—Canoe
A cross stroke is any stroke performed on the paddler’s offside
without switching hands. The cross forward stroke is a forward
Canoe paddling positions are termed onside and
offside. For solo canoeists, the side on which the
paddler performs the forward stroke is the onside
position. The opposite side becomes the offside. In
tandem canoes, the side on which the bow paddler
does the forward stroke becomes the onside.


WHITEWATER 47
.Basic Whitewater Skills
stroke done on the offside. It is frequently used by solo canoeists
to keep the boat moving forward while correcting the tendency
of the bow to go to the offside. The cross forward brings the
bow back to the onside.
• Catch—Without switching hands, swing your paddle across
your boat. Twist your upper body, rotating your shaft-hand
shoulder forward and your grip-hand shoulder backward.
Lean forward about 45 degrees, and place your blade
(buried to its throat) at the ready in the water. Your grip-
hand elbow will be behind your head (at about ear level),
and your arms should be extended out in front of you.
• Power—Forcefully bring your torso to an upright, vertical
position while pulling your hips toward your paddle. Your
paddle should stay perpendicular to the water.


48 WHITEWATER
Basic Whitewater Skills.
• Recovery—When your blade reaches your hips, rotate your
grip-hand thumb forward so that your paddle’s leading
edge is parallel to your boat. Slice your paddle through the
water back to the catch position. Rotate the blade so that it
is ready for your next stroke.
Draws
When you earned the Canoeing or Kayaking merit badge, you
learned to do the basic draw stroke to move your boat side-
ways toward the paddle. Whitewater boating uses several vari-
ations of the draw stroke.
Canoeists use the stationary draw to harness the river’s
power to pull the boat toward the paddle. This is an especially
useful stroke for entering and leaving eddies. To execute a
stationary draw from an eddy, move to the catch position with
your paddle shaft vertical in the water and your blade buried
to its throat. The paddle of the bow paddler or solo canoeist
should be planted in the downstream current just outside the
eddy line. Do not pull the boat toward the paddle. Instead,
slightly tilt the up-current edge of your paddle away from your
boat and hold it there. The current will grab your paddle and
“fly” it; all you have to do is hang on.
Both canoeists and kayakers can use the sculling draw to
pull the boat sideways or initiate a turn. Hold the paddle with
Sculling draw


WHITEWATER 49
.Basic Whitewater Skills
your upper or grip hand no higher than your forehead and your
other hand positioned about a shoulder-width lower on the pad-
dle shaft. The paddle shaft should be vertical and move in a path
2 to 3 feet long next to the side of the boat. Angle the blade at 45
degrees—as if you were spreading butter on a slice of bread—
and move the paddle from side to side. At the end of each stroke,
move the blade back in the opposite direction with the forward
edge up. In the sculling draw, the paddle strokes the shape of an
infinity sign (a sideways figure eight) in the water.
The bow paddler or solo canoe paddler also uses a cross
draw to move the boat sideways or initiate a turn. Without
switching hands, set up a cross draw by rotating your torso
perpendicular to the keel line of the canoe.
The elbow of your grip-hand arm should be well below
the level of your shoulder and rotated behind you. Your blade
goes into the water with your torso still coiled.
The power phase is simple—just leave your arms and
hands pretty much where they are, and unwind your upper
body, drawing the boat toward your paddle’s blade. Be sure
you do not allow the blade under your boat. The cross draw is
such a powerful stroke that you can tip your boat if you do not
stop in time.
Recover by dropping your grip hand. Re-rotate and twist
your torso, place the paddle back in the water, and repeat.
Setting up a cross draw
Cross draw power phase


50 WHITEWATER
Basic Whitewater Skills.
Pries
The pry stroke complements the draw. The draw moves the
boat toward your paddle; the pry moves it away. The bow pry
and stern pry are used by canoeists but rarely by kayakers.
Instead of doing a pry stroke on one side of the boat, the kayak-
er can simply do a draw stroke on the other side to get the
same results. Pries are powerful strokes for moving a canoe
toward the paddler’s offside.
• Catch—For the bow pry, hold your paddle perpendicular to
the canoe’s keel line, then place your paddle in the water
with its blade buried to the throat. Keep your forearm in
front of your face and your hand that is on the grip
farther out over the water than your lower hand. This
will position the blade slightly underneath the bow.
Your lower hand must be above the gunwales or your
paddle shaft must be between your hand (particularly
your thumb) and the gunwales. The pry often uses
the gunwales as a fulcrum, so be careful not to pinch
your thumb between your paddle and the gunwales.
For the stern pry, hold the paddle shaft
parallel to the side of the boat and place the grip
end of your paddle out over the water. Put the blade
in the water to the throat so that the blade is slightly
underneath the stern. The shaft hand should hold the
shaft against the gunwales.
• Power—Use the gunwales as
a fulcrum and pull your grip
hand into the boat. The power
of the stroke increases with
the speed you move your grip
hand. Keep the stroke short—
about a foot or so—since the
blade quickly begins pulling
your gunwales down, rather
than pushing them away.
• Recovery—You can do either an out-of-water or in-water
recovery. The out-of-water recovery is more efficient for the
stern pry and requires that you drop your grip hand down
toward your lap, slicing the blade out of the water. Return to
the starting point of the stroke by moving the grip hand out
over the water and the blade underneath the stern. The in-
Stern pry stroke—
catch phase
Stern pry
stroke—
power phase
From the stern
of a solo or
tandem canoe,
the stern pry is a
powerful turning
or correction
stroke. Keep the
pry stroke short
and fast. Repeat
the stroke if
necessary.


WHITEWATER 51
.Basic Whitewater Skills
water recovery is more efficient for the bow pry. At the end
of the stroke, turn the thumb of the grip hand away from
you and then slice the blade back underneath the bow as
you move the grip hand back out over the water.
The pry stroke will move your
canoe away from the paddling side.
Holding the paddle as you would for a
draw stroke, slip the blade back into the
water next to the canoe and pry it away.
Though it can be hard on the paddle
shaft, you can brace the shaft against
the canoe, using the gunwale as a ful-
crum or pivot for leveraging the stern
away from the blade of the paddle.
Braces
Braces are intended to catch you if you start to tip.
The low brace is a stabilizing stroke that prevents
you from tipping over. You can do a low brace
upstream or downstream from your boat. In a
canoe, you execute the low brace when your boat
starts tipping toward your onside. In a kayak, you
can use the low brace for either side.
In a solo canoe or kayak, execute a low brace by quickly
placing your paddle flat on the water (perpendicular to the
length of your boat). Press the paddle firmly down on the water
and use your knees and torso to flatten out your boat. The low
brace is the preferred stroke to prevent onside capsizing.
A high brace is a stroke that is used to prevent tipping to
the paddler’s offside. As the boat tips away from the pad-
dler’s onside, the paddler reaches out and does a quick draw
stroke to right the boat. This stroke is usually less effective
than the low brace, but in solo canoes, it is the only possible
stroke to do if your boat is tipping away from the side you
are paddling on.
Paddlers in tandem canoes must learn to do a combina-
tion of braces to prevent the boat from tipping over. If the
boat tips to the onside (the bow paddler’s paddling side), the
bow paddler would do a low brace while the stern paddler
would do a high brace. If the boat tips to the offside, the bow
paddler would do a high brace while the stern paddler would
do a low brace.
Pry stroke
for canoe
Low brace for canoe
Low brace for kayak
High brace for kayak


52 WHITEWATER
Basic Whitewater Skills.
Righting Pry
When the canoe or kayak tips toward the paddler’s onside, the
paddler should perform a brace to prevent the boat from com-
pletely tipping over. However, when the boat tips away from the
side of the boat where the paddle is located (toward the offside
in a canoe), a capsize can be prevented by doing a righting pry
on the paddler’s paddling side (the onside in a canoe). A right-
ing pry is done with the paddle shaft in a vertical position next
to the side of the boat. With the top hand on the canoe paddle
grip or on the kayak paddle shaft, the hand is pulled forcefully
and rapidly toward the center of the boat. In order to prevent a
capsize, the righting pry must be done very quickly and with-
out hesitation.
Rudder Stroke
The rudder stroke in a canoe on moving water or whitewater is
the same as on flatwater with one difference. On quiet water,
the thumb on the grip hand is turned down and away like it is
done with the J-stroke. With the paddle in the rudder position
next to the canoe, the rudder stroke can be followed by a stern
pry, which together mimic the J-stroke. If the boat is not in
motion, a strong stern pry will only slow or almost stop the
canoe. However, when current is moving the canoe through the
water, the top hand on the grip can rotate so the thumb of the
hand is pointing up instead of down This is a more comfortable
position for the hand and wrist. With the paddle blade vertical
next to the side of the canoe, it can be moved from side to side
by moving the top hand back and forth, making the blade act
like the rudder on a ship.
The rudder stroke in a kayak can be used to steer the boat
while it is in moving water or to keep it going straight when it is
gliding on quiet water. Both hands are over the water with the
paddle shaft parallel to the boat. The rear blade is straight up
and down and completely in the water. With the top or upper
hand on the paddle shaft, the paddler can move the hand back
and forth to control the direction of the kayak. Be sure that the
upper body is rotated while the head is facing straight ahead.


WHITEWATER 53
.Whitewater Maneuvers
Whitewater Maneuvers
Savvy boaters use the river’s power to take them where they
want to go. Technique, not strength, is what you need to
control your boat on the river.
Launching and Landing
You are as likely to upset your boat while launching and land-
ing as you are when on moving water. If you are using a canoe,
enter and exit only when your boat is completely in the water.
Launch and land with your canoe parallel to the shore so that
the boat is fully afloat and you can step in or out without
clambering over your load.
As you step into or climb out of your canoe, keep three
points of contact with the boat. Step into the center of your
boat, keeping both hands on the gunwales. Stay low as you
move about. In tandem canoes, one paddler should steady the
canoe while the other paddler climbs in. Then, the first aboard
should steady the canoe for the other paddler. In swift water,
the paddler down current enters first and exits last; this makes
it easier for the up-current paddler, while on land, to hold the
canoe and keep it from swinging out into the stream short
one paddler.
Many whitewater kayakers “seal launch,” that is,
they climb in on shore and push themselves and
their boats into the water. This is not recommended
because it can damage the kayak as well as the
fragile margins of rivers.


54 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Maneuvers.
Before you enter a kayak, put on your spray skirt. To
steady yourself as you slip into your craft, place your paddle
shaft against the coaming at the back of your boat’s cockpit
so that one blade is touching ground. Grasp the center of the
paddle shaft and the cockpit coaming with one hand and ease
yourself into the boat. Attach the spray skirt to the cockpit
rim and you’re ready to paddle off. Reverse this process to
climb out.
Paddling Forward in a Straight Line
In a solo canoe, the J-stroke allows for a smooth, continuous
forward stroke that keeps the boat on course with minimum
effort. Apply only as much “J” to the stroke as is needed to
keep the canoe going straight. Too much will turn the canoe.
If necessary, review and practice the J-stroke solo in flatwater
by picking a distant target and paddling to it in a straight line.
In a tandem canoe, the bow paddler should do a forward
stroke while the stern paddler does a J-stroke to keep the
boat on course.
In a kayak, forward motion is achieved with the basic
forward stroke. Stroke first on one side and then on the
other. Review and practice the forward stroke on flatwater
if necessary.
Coaming is the
raised edging
around the
cockpit for
keeping
water out.
The J-stroke is an
advanced stroke
that takes a lot
of practice.


.Whitewater Maneuvers
Backpaddling
Canoeists and kayakers use backstrokes to backpaddle, that is,
to slow or reverse the forward motion of the boat. You may
need to backpaddle to
• Run a set of waves slowly, giving your boat’s bow a chance
to rise above a wave so that it will stay dry.
• Give yourself more time to turn or move your boat sideways.
• Keep control in swift water, allowing more time to move left
or right or to stop.
• Slow your boat in anticipation of shallow water, rocks,
or sleepers.
• Stop your boat so you can scout or take a break.
• Back ferry (or “set”) to move your craft left or right
in the current while still facing downstream.
Eddy Turns
As you paddle downstream, you will want to stop in an eddy to
rest or to scout a rapid below. The maneuver to enter an eddy
while heading downstream is called an eddy turn. Later you
will learn how to exit an eddy using a peel out. When you have
learned how to move in and out of eddies with confidence and
ease, you will have passed a major whitewater skills milestone.
Entering an eddy while moving downstream in a boat can be
challenging, especially if the current is fast. The three important
components of an eddy turn are angle, speed, and edge or tilt.
Here are how these components are used in an eddy turn:
Step 1—Set the angle: Start well upstream and begin angling
your boat so that when it reaches the top of the eddy, the boat
will cross the eddy line at about a 45-degree angle. Aim the
bow so it crosses the eddy line as close as possible to the top of
the eddy. Avoid hitting the obstacle that is creating the eddy.
Step 2—Speed–Accelerate across the eddy line: As soon as
possible after the bow crosses the eddy line, plant the paddle in
the upstream current of the eddy so that the rest of the boat
will swing around the paddle as the pivot point.
WHITEWATER 55


56 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Maneuvers.
Step 3—Edge or tilt: Just before and as the boat enters the
eddy, the solo paddler or tandem paddlers must tilt or lean the
boat into the turn by using the lower body and shifting more
weight onto one knee in a canoe or one hip in a kayak. The
upper body should remain upright and move very little.
For kayakers and solo canoeists, an onside eddy turn uses
the forward stroke to build up enough momentum for the boat
to cross the eddy line at a 45-degree angle. As the bow and
then the paddler’s body enter the eddy, the bow or solo paddler
does a draw to the bow followed by a forward stroke. For tan-
dem canoeists, after the bow paddler’s body has crossed the
eddy line, the stern paddler does a quick draw stroke followed
by a series of forward sweeps. Once the stern has entered the
eddy, the bow and stern paddlers do forward strokes to move
up to the head of the eddy.
An offside eddy turn is more difficult than an onside turn.
For kayakers, the offside turn is performed like the onside turn
except with the other blade. Solo canoeists perform the same
steps as for the onside turn, but they must use a cross draw to
the bow and then a cross forward.
Tandem paddlers in a canoe use the same approach to the
eddy—including the angle and lean of the boat—as for the
onside eddy turn. However, instead of a bow draw, the bow
paddler does a cross draw. The stern paddler does a quick pry
before the boat crosses the eddy line, followed if necessary by a
small reverse sweep or quick pry off the stern gunwale, some-
times combined with a low brace. When the stern has entered
the eddy, the bow paddler does a stationary cross-bow draw fol-
lowed by a cross-bow forward stroke. Once in the eddy, the
stern paddler performs a forward stroke or J-stroke.
Tandem canoes
dance from eddy
to eddy by virtue
of technique and
communication.
Bow and stern
paddlers must
talk to each other
about where they
are going and how
they are going to
get there. Pause
at the top of a
rapid and have a
chat about how
you want to run
the rapid.
The strokes used by whitewater paddlers to do an
eddy turn depend on whether the maneuver is done
solo or in tandem and whether it is done in the onside
or offside position. Technically, kayakers do not have
an onside or offside since they have a paddle blade
on each side of the boat. For the purposes of this
section, the kayaker’s onside position will refer to the
side of the body with the dominant arm and will cor-
respond to the onside position for solo canoeists.


WHITEWATER 57
.Whitewater Maneuvers
Offside eddy turn
CURRENT
PRY AND REVERSE SWEEP
EDDY
CROSS-BOW
DRAW
CURRENT
CANOE PATH
Eddy turn—entering and exiting an eddy
EDDY CURRENT
ENTERING
EXITING
EDDY LINES
TILT BOAT INTO
EACH TURN.
FLOW


58 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Maneuvers.
Peel Outs
The peel out maneuver is used to exit an eddy and reenter the
main current of the river. Peel outs are easier than eddy turns
since you don’t have to worry about maneuvering in a fast-
moving downstream current. On the other hand, you will not
have the speed that comes from the current because you have
to cross the eddy line to exit. When done correctly with the
right combination of speed, angle, and lean, any paddler can
do a smart-looking turn into the current without a set of
complicated strokes.
Here are the basic steps to safely doing a peel out:
Step 1—Speed: Exiting the eddy requires the boat to have suf-
ficient speed to clear the eddy line. Position the boat near the
eddy line and toward the bottom of the eddy so that you can
take several strokes before exiting.
Step 2— Angle: Exit at the top of the eddy as close as possible
to the start of the eddy line at about a 45-degree angle. Keep
in mind: The faster the downstream current, the smaller the
angle of entry.
Step 3— Edge or tilt: As the bow crosses the eddy line, tilt the
boat downstream by shifting more weight onto one knee in a
canoe or one hip in a kayak. Your upper body should move
only slightly.
To do an onside peel out for kayakers and solo canoeists,
paddle forward with enough speed to clear the eddy. Solo
canoeists may need to use a combination of the cross forward
stroke, forward stroke, and J-stroke to exit the eddy at the
correct angle. As the bow begins to cross the eddy line, shift
your weight to the downstream side of the boat. Keep paddling
forward to maintain your momentum. Only after your body has
crossed the eddy line should you do a turning stroke such as a
bow draw or stern pry. In many instances—if you have the
right momentum and lean—the current will turn your bow
downstream without any turning stroke at all.
Tandem canoeists doing an onside peel out follow the
same steps as solo canoeists, but have the advantage of two
paddlers to build up speed to exit the eddy. Once across the
eddy line, the bow paddler does a turning stroke such as a bow
draw while the stern paddler continues to power the boat out
of the eddy with forward or J-strokes. As the bow of the boat
With two
paddlers in
the boat, it is
important to
coordinate the
downstream lean
so both are
edging the
boat in the same
direction at the
same time.


.Whitewater Maneuvers
begins to turn downstream, the stern paddler can do forward
sweeps if there is enough speed and momentum to carry the
boat out of the eddy.
An offside peel out incorporates all the same features of
the onside peel out except that the turning strokes are different.
For kayakers, the opposite paddle blade is used for the turning
stroke. After crossing the eddy line, solo canoeists can use a
variety of turning strokes, including a forward sweep or cross-
bow draw. Tandem canoeists use a combination of a cross-bow
draw in the bow while the stern paddler does a low bracing
reverse sweep or simply powers ahead with a forward
or J-stroke.
MAIN
CURRENT
MAIN
CURRENT
EDDY
CURRENT
EDDY
CURRENT FORWARD
SWEEP
ONSIDE
DRAW
FORWARD
STROKE
WITH KNEES, BOTH
PADDLERS TILT
BOAT INTO TURN
WHITEWATER 59
In the peel out, note how both paddlers use their
left knees to lean into and tilt the boat into the turn.


60 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Maneuvers.
Ferrying Upstream and Downstream
Upstream (forward) ferries and downstream (back) ferries move
you sideways across the current. In an upstream ferry, you face
upstream and paddle forward with your bow at an angle to the
current. You move across the current in the direction your bow
is pointing. To perform a downstream ferry, you face down-
stream and backpaddle with your stern pointed upstream at an
angle to the current. You move across the current in the direc-
tion your stern is facing.
To perform a successful upstream ferry, begin by turning
your boat until it faces upstream. As you start paddling,
adjust the ferry angle—the angle of the boat compared to the
upstream—to about 10 degrees. If you are moving out of an
eddy into the current, enter the current as if you were doing
a peel out by exiting the eddy at about a 45-degree angle and
leaning downstream. Instead of turning downstream, paddle
directly into the upstream current as quickly as possible.
Gradually increase the ferry angle by allowing the bow
of your boat to point a little to one side of where the current
is flowing. Use a small ferry angle if the current is fast and a
larger angle if the current is slow. The smaller the ferry angle,
the less your boat will drift downstream, but your crossing
speed will be slower. On the other hand, if you use a large
ferry angle, you will get across the river faster, but you will
end up farther downstream. Your paddling counters the river’s
tendency to pull you downstream, and your boat’s angle off
the current allows the river to nudge you toward the far bank.
This can be tricky, so practice by ferrying across an easy
current with the goal of reducing the number of strokes
needed to cross the stream.
Kayakers and solo canoeists use the forward stroke
with an occasional stern draw or pry stroke to keep
them angled into the current. In a tandem canoe, the
bow paddler does forward strokes while the stern
paddler does combinations of strokes to keep the
boat at the desired angle to the current.


WHITEWATER 61
.Whitewater Maneuvers
Downstream ferries are more difficult than upstream ferries.
To perform a successful downstream ferry, point the stern of
your boat almost directly upstream and exit into the current.
Kayakers and canoeists use backstrokes and control their angle
to the current with draws and pries. Tandem canoe paddlers
use the backstroke while doing a downstream ferry. The stern
paddler, with occasional help from the bow paddler, is respon-
sible for steering the boat.
Upstream ferry across river to avoid obstacles.
To keep the boat
at the correct
angle during a
downstream ferry,
the bow paddler
can steer by using
a combination
of backstrokes
with bow draws
and pries.
Remember: It is the angle of your boat to the current,
not to the shore, that determines your ferry angle.
Over time you will become skillful in reading currents,
and upstream and downstream ferries will become
second nature.
1
2
3
4
5
6
7


62 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Maneuvers.
River Signals
Running rapids takes teamwork. Teammates should discuss
their run on an ongoing basis and make adjustments to any
plan as needed. Sometimes, however, talk is impossible. Even a
small riffle can muffle words, and roaring rapids often drown
out speech altogether. For emergencies or times when talk is
difficult, river runners make use of whistles and paddle signals
to communicate. Review river signals before the beginning of
every trip.
Here are important emergency
and directional signals.
• “Stop!”
Raise and lower a paddle
horizontally over your head
or hold both arms out at right
angles to your body and
wave them up and down.
• “Help!/Emergency”
Give three long blasts of your
whistle while waving your
paddle, your helmet (if on
shore), or throw rope back
and forth over your head.
• “Are you OK?”
Raise one arm over your
head, bend your elbow
outward, and tap your
helmet with your fingertips.
To respond that you are
OK to someone signaling
you, return the same signal.
Remember:
River right and
river left always
refer to the right
side or the left side
of the river as if
you were facing
downstream.


WHITEWATER 63
.Whitewater Maneuvers
• “Run down the center” or
“Come ahead” or “All clear’’
Hold your paddle blade in a
vertical position above your
head with the blade flat for
maximum visibility.
• “Run river left”
As the lead paddler who has run
the drop, you are facing back
upstream and directing those
following to run river left. Point
your paddle in the direction
you want others to follow, at a
45-degree angle, with the blade
flat (for better visibility).
• “Run river right”
As the lead paddler who has run
the drop, you are facing back
upstream and directing those
following to run river right.
Point your paddle in the direc-
tion you want others to follow,
at a 45-degree angle, with the
blade flat (for better visibility).
Important: Always use directional paddle signals to
indicate where the safe route through a drop lies.
Never point toward hazards.


64 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Maneuvers.
Portaging
Portaging is a normal part of running rivers.
When you have scouted a stretch of river
and determined that the rapids are impass-
able or beyond your capabilities or your
equipment, it is time to portage (or carry)
your canoe or kayak over land to a safer
place on the river. Always portage around
low-head dams and weirs or any sheer drop
or strainer that cannot safely be avoided.
Shallows may also require a portage. When
assessing a rough stretch of river, a good
rule is, “When in doubt, walk around.”
To portage a canoe with a yoke, posi-
tion yourself near the bow of the canoe and
your buddy near the stern. Reach across the
canoe and grasp the gunwales, then in uni-
son lift the canoe and flip it over your
heads, turning yourselves forward as you
do. As your partner stabilizes the canoe,
walk your hands backward along the gun-
wales until you can tuck your shoulders
against the yoke. Your partner is free to
duck out from under the canoe, and you
are ready to begin a portage. Your partner
leads the way as you walk, alerting you to
obstacles or turns.
With practice, one canoeist can lift a
canoe for portaging. To begin, stand at one
side of the upright canoe, near the stern
and facing the bow. Grasp the gunwales,
one in each hand, a few feet from the stern.
Turn the canoe over and lift it over your
head, allowing the bow to remain on the
ground. Holding the gunwales, begin “walk-
ing” toward the bow. As you reach the cen-
ter of the canoe, its weight will balance
over your shoulders and the bow will lift
off the ground. Ease the yoke onto your
shoulders to carry the canoe.
Portaging


WHITEWATER 65
.Whitewater Maneuvers
Many kayaks have toggles installed at the bow and stern,
positioned for two people to lift and carry a craft. For a solo
carry, reach across the cockpit, lift the kayak, and flip it onto
your shoulder. (If the kayak is heavy, allow the stern to stay
on the ground as you lift and position it.) Shift the cockpit
on your shoulder to reach the kayak’s balance point, and you
should be ready for a relatively easy tote to your destination.
There’s an old
saying that no one
ever drowned on
a portage.
If there is no portage yoke, the canoe can be
transported using a two-person carry.
Carrying a kayak





WHITEWATER 67
.Rescue Techniques
Rescue Techniques
Every kayaker and canoeist capsizes from time to time. When-
ever you take a spill, make the safety of the people involved
your top priority. Equipment and gear can be replaced; people
cannot. Practice to become adept at recovering from a capsize
and learn to use a throw rope to rescue other paddlers.
Self-Rescue
When you capsize, follow these steps:
Step 1—If you can, stay in your righted boat, even if it is
flooded. The hull can protect you from banging into obstacles.
You may be able to climb back in (assisted or unassisted by
other boats) and then paddle to shore. If you are in a kayak
with or without a spray skirt or in a solo whitewater canoe
with thigh straps, exit the boat as quickly as possible. You may
have to pop the skirt or loosen the straps to free yourself from
the boat. As you become more experienced, you can learn to
right yourself using an Eskimo roll. Intermediate kayakers and
advanced canoeists learn how to do the Eskimo roll so that if
they turn over while in their boats, they can flip back up again
without having to do a wet exit.
Step 2—If you have been tossed into the water, hold on to your
boat. It will stay afloat, and it will be easy for rescuers to spot.
Stay upstream of your boat so you do not get caught between
your fast-moving boat and a hard obstacle like a boulder.
Step 3—In the following situations, swim aggressively for shore.
a. You have been thrown clear of your boat.
b. The water is very cold.
c. You are approaching worsening rapids.
d. No rescue is forthcoming.


68 WHITEWATER
Rescue Techniques.
Step 4—If you must ride out a rapid before swimming to
safety or catching a rescue line, stay on your back in fast water,
keeping your feet and legs floating high and downstream so
they can act as shock absorbers to fend off rocks. Use a back-
stroke to maneuver past obstacles and keep an eye out for an
eddy that might offer protection.
Step 5—Do not stand up in swift-moving water above your
knees. If your feet were to become entrapped under rocks, the
current could knock you over—either backward or forward—
and then force your head under the water.
Step 6—If you find yourself being swept toward a strainer,
change from a feetfirst position to an active headfirst swimming
position with your head out of the water. Try to climb up on
top of the strainer as far as you can get, and aggressively pull
yourself onto it to avoid getting sucked underneath.
Step 7—When rescuers are trying to assist you, do all you can
to help them help you.
Capsize Drills
Intentionally capsize your craft in calm water and practice recovering
from the spills until your reactions become automatic.
To safely capsize a canoe, sit next to your paddling partner in the
bottom of the canoe facing the same side. Let your legs hang over the
gunwale. Put your hand nearest your partner on the gunwale behind
you. Put your other hand on the gunwale in front of you. Rock forward
and backward until the gunwale in front of you goes below the water
level and the canoe begins to fill with water.
To practice a “wet exit” from a kayak, lean your body out over the
water to cause your boat to capsize. Release the spray skirt from the
coaming then lean forward with your forehead near the deck and push
on the sides of the coaming with your hands. This will push you out of
the kayak. When your legs and feet are clear, let them drop toward the
bottom. Keep your grip on the coaming throughout the maneuver.
When you are in the feet-down position in the water, bring your head
up on one side of the capsized kayak. After completing the wet exit,
turn the kayak so you can grab an end loop. Push or pull the kayak to
shallow water, keeping it upside down so that the air trapped in the
cockpit will keep the boat afloat.


WHITEWATER 69
.Rescue Techniques
Capsize drill
1
2
3
4


70 WHITEWATER
Rescue Techniques.
Using a Throw Rope to Rescue Others
As you will recall, a throw rope is a floating rope that is stored in
a throw bag. The rope will pay out neatly when the bag
is tossed. A throw bag or a neatly coiled throw rope should
always be secured in your craft so that it will be handy in
a rescue situation but is not an entrapment hazard.
To rescue swimmers with a
throw rope follow these steps:
Step 1—Remove enough rope
from the bag so that you can
throw the bag while holding
on to the loose end of the rope
with your other hand. Allow the
remainder of the rope to stay in
the bag. It will pay out when
the bag is thrown. Be sure that
the mouth of the bag is only
halfway open.
Step 2—Get the attention of the
person in the water by yelling,
“Rope!” or giving a single blast
of your whistle. Establish eye
contact with the swimmer.
Step 3—Grasp or step on the free
end of the rope and toss the bag at
the swimmer. Aim at, or slightly
beyond, the swimmer’s head. If
you miss, quickly restuff the bag
or make arm-length coils of rope
and try again.


WHITEWATER 71
.Rescue Techniques
Step 4—The victim should grab the rope and roll over on the
back with the rope held in the middle of the chest and the rope
going over the shoulder. The victim must not wrap the rope
around a hand or fasten the body in any way to the rope—just
hold on. Either pull in the line to bring the person to
safety, or allow the person to swing on the line to the bank.
Walking your end of the line along the shore may help the
swimmer cope with the current and avoid obstacles. Take great
care not to be pulled into the water yourself. If necessary, sit
down to help hold against the force on the line or belay the
line around a tree or rock. Do not tie the rope to anything; this
will help prevent the victim from being held under-water
should he or she become entangled in the rope.
Practice Using the Throw Rope
Using a throw rope effectively takes practice. If you cannot practice in a
controlled setting in a river, practice on land with a buddy by doing the
following exercises.
1. Have your buddy pretend to be a slow-moving victim about 30 to
45 feet away. Toss the throw bag to your buddy as he or she moves
slowly by you.
2. Practice what you would do if you missed the throw the first time.
Retrieve the rope by making long coils. Divide the coils between your
hands and throw the rope again to your buddy. Practice both short
and long throws and at different speeds as your buddy pretends to
be in slow and fast moving currents.





WHITEWATER 73
.Trip Planning
Trip Planning
Before you head out to demonstrate your whitewater skills,
work with your merit badge counselor or another qualified
adult to select the river course and choose group participants.
Consult with your counselor to make sure that the course is
within the capabilities of all participants and that the equipment
you will be using is appropriate for the activity.
Research and prepare a float plan that specifies your route.
Be sure to include put in and take out points. Set up a sched-
ule in which you determine how much time you will need to
safely float the stretch of river you selected. Double-check your
equipment and review safety precautions and emergency pro-
cedures. Identify your options in the event of a problem with
equipment, a sudden change in weather, or a medical emergen-
cy. A review of the Scouting America Safety Afloat policy and
the American Whitewater safety guidelines will help you with
these tasks.
Obtaining Necessary Permissions
The use of many rivers is governed by special rules
and permits. Stay on the right side of the law, and get
permission to float before you go. You will often find
that a state or federal agency holds jurisdiction over
the stretch of river you want to run. If you will be
crossing private property, always get permission from
the landowner. Local boating shops, river guidebooks,
maps, and government-agency websites can provide
information about whom you need to contact.


Personal and Group Equipment
Before you head out on the river, always double-check that
you have both personal and group essentials necessary for
a safe whitewater outing. This checklist provides some
guidelines, but you may need to adapt it to reflect your
specific needs and the purpose of your trip.
Place everything that must stay dry in waterproof
containers such as dry bags, boxes, buckets, or barrels. Items
that need to stay dry include food, spare clothing, first-aid
kits, maps, sleeping bags, tents, and other camping equipment.
Use cam straps, bungee cords, and pieces of rope to
secure items and equipment so they will not fall out past the
gunwales if you capsize. Dry bags are often lashed in gunwale
to gunwale. All loose rope should be stowed out of the way. It
is vital that your lashing does not pose an entrapment hazard.
Personal Essentials
■■ Life jacket with whistle
■■ Helmet
■■ Pocketknife
■■ Spare clothing
■■ Rain gear
■■ Unbreakable water bottles filled with water
■■ Lunch and/or snacks
■■ Sun protection (including sunscreen,
brimmed hat, and sunglasses with a strap)
■■ Map and compass
■■ Spare glasses (if you wear them)
■■ First-aid kit
Packing for a whitewater trip


WHITEWATER 75
.Trip Planning.Trip Planning
Essential Group Equipment
Group equipment should be evenly distributed among all the boats.
Here is a general list of equipment. Adjust your own list to suit the
length of time you will be out and the number of people participating.
■■ Spare paddle (at least one per
party, preferably one per boat)
■■ Flotation (air bags or foam) in
each boat to keep the boat
afloat if you capsize
■■ For canoes: A bailer made of
a cut-out gallon plastic jug,
attached to the floor of your
boat with a very short length
of line or webbing and a
plastic fastener
■■ Large absorbent sponge to
soak up splashes and clean
up sand and mud
■■ For open canoes: Bow and
stern lines (painters) securely
attached. Use ropes at least
5 feet longer than your boat,
5
⁄16 inch or 3
⁄8 inch in diameter.
Secure them to the canoe so
that they are readily available
but will not entangle feet and
legs in case of a spill.
■■ Water filter or water
treatment tablets.
During a whitewater
outing, you’ll need
as much water as
you would during
a strenuous hike.
Having a means of treating
water while afloat will help
avoid dehydration.
■■ Throw rope in a bag
■■ First-aid kit
■■ Waterproof matches, lighter,
candle, or fire starter
■■ Duct tape and a repair kit
■■ Handheld bilge pump
(optional)
■■ Camping equipment
(for overnight trips)


76 WHITEWATER
Trip Planning.
River Etiquette
River etiquette is simply showing courtesy and respect
for people you encounter on the river including other
boaters, fishers, and swimmers. Here are some com-
mon guidelines for being a good ambassador for
whitewater paddling.
• Yield the right of way to crafts with less maneu-
verability such as rafts and boats running straight
through a rapid.
• When running down a river, try to pick a path that
will not interfere with another paddler playing in a
hole or surfing a wave.
• Do not tailgate through a rapid. Leave plenty of
space between boats.
• If an eddy is already full of boats, wait upstream
until there is room or find another one downstream.
• Pass other boats with care. Do not try to pass
in a rapid.
• Allow faster boats to pass.
• Stay out of other boaters’ way. Pass fishers quietly
and give them as much space as possible.
• Share play spots with other boaters and wait
your turn.
• Do not crowd boating classes or novice boaters.
Bear in mind that river recreation often concentrates
a lot of traffic into a narrow corridor. Many of our
rivers are in danger of being loved to death. Take care
of stream banks when you launch and land your boat,
and walk gently on the land. Practice Leave No Trace
principles. Respect the river so that future generations
will be able to enjoy the thrill, mystery, and beauty of
whitewater paddling.





78 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Resources.
Scouting Resources
Safety Afloat; Fieldbook; Whitewater
Rafting Scouting America Award;
Aquatics Supervision; Canoeing and
Kayaking merit badge pamphlets
Training: Scouting America Paddle Craft
Safety Course–Basic and Moving Water
Video: “Reading the Rhythms of Rivers
and Rapids”
Books
Bechdel, Les, and Slim Ray. River
Rescue: A Manual for Whitewater
Safety, 4th ed. CFS Press, 2009.
Bennett, Jeff. The Essential Whitewater
Kayaker: A Complete Course. Ragged
Mountain Press, 1999.
Grant, Gordon. Canoeing: A Trailside
Guide. W.W. Norton & Co., 2003.
Jackson, Eric. Whitewater Paddling:
Strokes & Concepts. Stackpole
Books, 1999.
Mason, Bill. Path of the Paddle: An
Illustrated Guide to the Art of
Canoeing (revised and updated by
Paul Mason). Firefly Books, 1999.
Mason, Paul, and Mark Scriver. Thrill
of the Paddle: The Art of Whitewater
Canoeing. Firefly Books, 1999.
Ray, Slim. The Canoe Handbook:
Techniques for Mastering the Sport of
Canoeing. Stackpole Books, 1992.
Whiting, Ken, and Kevin Varette.
Whitewater Kayaking: The
Ultimate Guide, 2nd ed. The
Heliconia Press, 2012.
Magazines
Canoe & Kayak
2052 Corte Del Nogal, Suite 100
Carlsbad, CA 92011
Website: www.canoekayak.com
Paddling Magazine
55 Red Pine Drive
Palmer Rapids, Ontario, Canada
Telephone: 613-706-0677
Website: www.rapidmedia.com
Whitewater Resources
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


WHITEWATER 79
.Whitewater Resources
Organizations
American Canoe Association
503 Sophia St., Suite 100
Fredericksburg, VA 22401
Telephone: 540-907-4460
Website: www.americancanoe.org
American Whitewater
P.O. Box 1540
Cullowhee, NC 28723
Toll-free telephone: 866-262-8429
Website: www.americanwhitewater.org
Apps and Other Websites
ACA Paddle Quest—Interactive game
for children and families. Free on the
App Store and Google Play.
ACA Paddle Ready app—Float plans,
weather, river forecasting, and more.
Free on iPhone and Android.
American Whitewater National
Whitewater Inventory—A list of all the
rivers in the U.S. by state with current
flow rate information: www.american-
whitewater.org/content/River/view/
American Whitewater permit informa-
tion—A list of all rivers in the U.S. by
state that require permits with links to
the applications: www.americanwhite-
water.org/content/River/list-permits/
National Center for Cold Water Safety—
Information on cold water–related
illnesses: www.coldwatersafety.org
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Robin Pope
and Richard Thomas for their leader-
ship and expert knowledge in the revi-
sion of this merit badge pamphlet.
Robin Pope is president of the
American Canoe Association (ACA)
and an instructor trainer educator in
swiftwater rescue (level 5) and river
kayaking (level 5). He was also a major
contributor to the Kayaking merit
badge pamphlet. Richard Thomas is a
Scouting America Aquatics Instructor,
National Camping School aquatics
instructor, and ACA instructor in canoe-
ing (level 2). He was formerly an ACA
canoe instructor trainer and river canoe
instructor. They were assisted in their
efforts by Chris Stec, ACA chief operat-
ing officer and instructor trainer educa-
tor whitewater canoe (level 4).
Scouting America also recognizes David
Kurtz, Lynn Brennard, and John
Brennard for their review and thought-
ful suggestions.
The previous edition of this merit
badge pamphlet was written by Bruce
Newell with assistance from Richard
Thomas. Scouting America is grateful
to the late Ernest F. Schmidt for his
early efforts to make whitewater activi-
ties a distinct part of the Scouting pro-
gram. We also gratefully acknowledge
the work of the Scouting America
Whitewater Task Force, which was
chaired by K. Gregory Tucker, in devel-
oping the original Whitewater merit
badge requirements and first edition of
the pamphlet.


80 WHITEWATER
Whitewater Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Shutterstock.com—cover (helmet,
©2happy); pages 24 (©Olena
Bloshchynska), 33 (©UllrichG),
and 72 (©Helioscribe)
All other photos not mentioned above
are the property of or are protected by
Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—cover (paddles); pages 17
and 41 (both)
John McDearmon—all illustrations
Randy Piland—cover (packed canoe);
pages 54, 65 (all), 74, and 77