WILDERNESS
SURVIVAL


WILDERNESS
SURVIVAL
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Wilderness-Survival or check
Scoutbook for the latest requirements.
35966
ISBN 978-0-8395-3265-1
©2024 Scouting America/Boy Scouts of America
2024 Printing FPO


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 3





WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 5
Contents
Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Preventing Emergencies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Being Prepared as a Group . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
Survival Challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Protecting Yourself in the Wilderness . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
Wilderness Survival First Aid . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 51
A Final Word. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 61
Wilderness Survival Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62


6 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Introduction.
Introduction
Wilderness survival—taking care of ourselves in ways that allow
us to come home safely—is what we do whenever we are in
the outdoors. Most of the time we get along just fine when we
are camping, backpacking, canoeing, and taking part in other
outdoor activities. We have brought along the clothing and gear
we need. We’ve made good plans, and we do our best to man-
age any risks.
But now and then something unexpected happens. We
wander off a trail and lose our way. Someone becomes injured.
A storm catches us by surprise. A boat capsizes. A snowmobile
runs out of gas far from a road. We no longer know where we
are, or we find ourselves without the equipment, water, and
food that we usually take on our adventures.
When things go wrong, the skills of wilderness survival
can help make everything right again. Thinking through the
challenges that face us and coming up with good solutions
are vital to taking care of ourselves in the outdoors, especially
when we must get out of difficulties. Wilderness survival means
knowing how to stay alive and well until the emergency is over.
It means working with nature rather than against it. It means
always having a positive attitude—the one essential that can’t
be carried in a pack or a pocket.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 7
.Introduction
Mastering wilderness survival takes practice. During trips
to the outdoors that are not emergencies, you can learn to light
a fire without matches, build a shelter without a tent, signal for
help, and practice first aid. Earning the Wilderness Survival
merit badge will get you started in the right direction, but there
is always more to learn.
Natural Disasters
As recent events in the United
States have shown, the skills
of wilderness survival can be
every bit as important during
natural disasters as they are
during backcountry outings.
Hurricanes, tornadoes, wind
storms, blizzards, wildfires,
and power outages can put
people in situations where the
usual networks of support are
not available. People might be
on their own for a few hours,
a few days, or even longer
periods of time.
The preparations you can take to respond to emergencies, whether
in a city, a rural area, or deep in a wilderness, are the same. Whenever
an emergency occurs, use your head to size up the situation and seek
out solutions.





WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 9
.Preventing Emergencies
Preventing Emergencies
The best emergency is the one that never happens. Prevention
is the result of preparing well, making good plans, and having
the proper equipment. As you begin thinking about what you
will do in case of an emergency, it can be helpful to know some
of the primary causes of survival situations.
• Not planning ahead, or failing to prepare a trip plan
• Not having good leadership in your group
• Being in poor physical condition, wearing the wrong clothing
or footwear, or lacking the motivation or skills for the activity
• Not eating enough, or eating the wrong diet
• Becoming too tired, too cold or too hot, or thirsty
• Not recognizing and dealing with a potential problem
• Encountering unexpected changes in the weather or
unexpected terrain
We seldom go to
the backcountry
with the intention
of getting
ourselves into
survival situations.
In fact, our basic
instinct is to do
the opposite—
to prepare well
and stay as safe
as possible.


Preventing Emergencies.
Trip Plan
A trip plan answers five questions, each beginning with the
letter W:
A copy of your trip plan should be left back home
with one or more persons who are responsible, reliable,
and available. If you don’t return as scheduled, those back
home can alert search-and-rescue personnel and give them
a good idea where to start looking for you.
Where are we going and by which route?
When will we return?
Who is going along?
Why are we going?
What are we taking with us?
Check the
Guide to Safe
Scouting for
more guidelines
on trip planning.
You can find the
Guide online
at www.scouting.
org/health-and-
safety/gss/.
10 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL


.Preventing Emergencies
WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 11
Emergency Survival Kits
Many items you regularly carry into the outdoors will fill
the requirements of a survival kit. A well-prepared camper/
hiker will already have the components for a survival kit in
their pack so may not need to add additional items to make up
a survival kit. A survival kit has four essential elements:
1. Fire-starting gear (flint and steel, matches, magnifying glass)
2. Signaling material (audio and visual: whistle, signal mirror)
3. Water-gathering material (water bottle, trash bag)
4. Food-gathering material (fishing hook & line, snare wire).
Note that while the longer list on the next page includes more
items, they all fall into these four essential elements.


12 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Preventing Emergencies.
Every survival kit begins with the Outdoor Essentials.
Get into the habit of having them with you on every trip into
the backcountry.
Pocketknife
First-aid kit
Extra clothing
Rain gear
Water bottle
Flashlight
Trail food
Matches and
fire starters
Sun protection
Map and compass
Water treatment tablets
Adding some or all of the following items to your emergency kit
can come in handy during survival situations.
Duct Tape. Wrap a length of it around a plastic water bottle
and you will always have some handy.
Whistle. A whistle can be heard for longer distances than
shouting can and requires less energy.
Signal Mirror. A metal signal mirror can be slipped into your
first-aid kit or a side pocket of your pack. Keep it in its case
or slip it inside a spare sock to protect it from becoming
scratched and dull.
Thin Wire. A few feet of thin wire can come in handy for
repairing camping gear.
Trash Bag. A heavy-duty 30- to 39-gallon plastic bag, prefera-
bly in a bright color, can be used for emergency rain gear, to
protect tinder and kindling from the rain, and to shield your
sleeping bag and other equipment.
Fishing Line and Hooks. Fifty feet of nylon fishing line can
have many uses for making repairs. Add a few hooks and you
will have the gear you need to try fishing in lakes and streams.


.Preventing Emergencies
WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 13
Survival Without Kits
Sometimes an emergency occurs when you don’t have a survival kit with
you. You will still have a good head on your shoulders and the ability to
use it. Make the best of a situation by using the resources around you, by
drawing on your skills and knowledge, and by having a positive attitude.
Mobile Phones and Global Positioning Receivers
Global positioning system (GPS) receivers allow travelers to
pinpoint locations, but they are no substitute for mastering
the use of maps and compasses. Likewise, mobile telephones
can be a convenient means for groups to contact emergency
response personnel, but phones are useless if they malfunction,
the batteries are exhausted, or distance and terrain prevent
clear reception of signals.
Unnecessary use of mobile phones can take away some of
the joy of backcountry solitude, independence, and challenge.
If you carry a portable telephone, stow it deep in your pack and
bring it out only for emergency calls. Most of all, never assume
that having a portable telephone, GPS receiver, or any other
electronic device gives you any protection to attempt activities
beyond your levels of skill and experience, especially if you are
far from emergency support.


14 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Preventing Emergencies.
Clothing as Survival Gear
Clothing is your first line of defense against the
elements. It keeps you warm in the winter,
cool in the summer, dry in storms, and
sheltered from insects, sun, and wind. To
help decide what you need, learn about the
materials from which clothing is made.
Wool. For generations of backcountry travelers,
wool was the fabric of choice. Of course, that’s
about all there was for making warm clothing.
Wool is still terrific for many cold-weather
adventures. It is durable and water-resistant,
and can help you keep warm even when the
fabric is wet. A wool shirt or sweater can ward off the
chill of summer evenings, too. Wool is also an excellent
choice in hiking socks, hats, and mittens. (If wool
irritates your skin, you may be able to wear wool blends
or wear woolen layers over clothing made of
other fabrics.)
Cotton. Cotton clothing is cool and comfortable. That
makes it very good for hot-weather shirts and shorts,
especially in dry climates. If cotton becomes wet,
though, it loses its ability to insulate, and it may be
slow to dry. That can be a real danger on cool days,
especially when mist, rain, and wind bring with them
the threat of hypothermia.
Synthetics. Outdoor clothing made of nylon, polypro-
pylene, and other manufactured fabrics can be sturdy
and comfortable and can maintain warmth even when
wet. Look for synthetics in underwear, shirts, sweaters,
jackets, pants, mittens, and hats. Lightweight nylon
shorts and shirts are ideal for hot weather, drying
quickly when wet. Waterproof and breathable syn-
thetic fabrics are used in parkas and rain gear and as
the shells of mittens and gloves.
Choose layers of clothing that, when combined,
will meet the most extreme weather you expect to
encounter. On a chilly autumn day, for example, you


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 15
.Preventing Emergencies
You can also use
the layering
system to keep
cool in hot
climates by
stripping down
to hiking shorts,
a T-shirt, and a
brimmed hat.
Lightweight long
pants and a
long-sleeved
shirt will shield
you from insects,
brush, and the sun.
might set out from the trailhead wearing long pants, a wool
shirt, a fleece sweater, mittens, and a stocking hat. As you hike,
the effort will cause your body to generate heat. Peel off the
sweater and stuff it in your pack. If you are still too warm,
loosen a few buttons on your shirt or slip off your mittens
and hat.
When you are no longer exerting yourself, stay warm by
reversing the procedure, pulling on enough layers of clothing
to stay comfortable. After the sun goes down, you may want
to add an insulated parka and fleece pants or long underwear.
Basic Warm-Weather
Clothing Checklist
q T-shirt or lightweight short-sleeved shirt
q Hiking shorts
q Underwear
q Socks
q Long-sleeved shirt (lightweight)
q Long pants (lightweight)
q Sweater or warm jacket
q Brimmed hat
q Bandannas
q Rain gear
q Appropriate hiking footwear
WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 15


16 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Preventing Emergencies.
Basic Cold-Weather
Clothing Checklist
q Long-sleeved shirt
q Long pants (fleece, wool, or synthetic blend)
q Sweater (fleece or wool)
q Long underwear (polypropylene)
q Socks (wool or synthetic blend)
q Warm hooded parka or jacket
q Stocking hat (fleece or wool)
q Mittens or gloves (fleece or wool) with
water-resistant shells
q Wool scarf
q Rain gear
q Appropriate cold/wet weather footwear


.Preventing Emergencies
Rain Gear
No matter how clear the skies as you pack for a
backcountry trek, prepare for nasty weather. Rain pants
and a rain jacket with a hood should serve you well in
most situations, especially if, for warmth, you have
other clothing to layer beneath your rain gear.
When you are active, moisture from sweat can
condense on the inside of your rain gear, making you
feel clammy and chilled. To help avoid that feeling,
choose rain gear that fits loosely enough to give
you freedom of movement and to allow perspiration to vent
through the neck, cuffs, and waist. You should also select
rain gear made of a breathable fabric that allows moisture
to escape but prevents rain and snowmelt from seeping in.
WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 17
Prevention goes hand in hand
with mitigation, which means “to
lessen in force or intensity” and
“to make less severe.” By taking
precautions to manage risk and
the possibility of injury, you can
be prepared to anticipate, help
prevent, mitigate, and respond
to just about any incident that
might happen while participating
in wilderness survival activities.





WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 19
.Being Prepared as a Group
Being Prepared
as a Group
Many people keep things to themselves. They
don’t want to hold up the team or are worried
about what others will think of them. An
important step in avoiding backcountry emer-
gencies is letting your companions know when
you are having a hard time or if you are aware
of something that might affect you or the group.
Remember, stopping for a few moments to
deal with a hot spot on a heel can avoid bringing
the group to a long halt later in the day when blisters
break out. Saying something about changing weather or
asking questions about the route that group leaders have
chosen can bring important matters to the attention of the rest
of your group and help everyone make good decisions.
Keep a Positive Attitude
Many survivors of wilderness emergencies have said that a will-
ingness to survive is the key factor in getting through a difficult
situation. You might assume that everyone has an equal desire
to survive, but that is not always the case. Some people will
endure almost unbelievable conditions while others in much
less difficult situations might simply give up and quit. Make a
conscious choice to be among those who can and will endure.
Being Prepared Yourself
Most important is how you think about things when you are confronted
with a survival situation. Learn the right things to do at the right time,
then practice these techniques until you know them by heart, and you
will build your confidence in dealing with wilderness emergencies.


20 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Being Prepared as a Group.
Learn Survival Skills
Learning how to think about wilderness survival and then
mastering skills of staying alive can make all the difference if
you ever become lost or face other backcountry emergencies.
A good way to begin is by completing the outdoor-oriented
requirements for the ranks of Scouting. Earning merit badges
like Camping, First Aid, Hiking, Backpacking, Orienteering, and
Pioneering can also be helpful. Most of all, spend time in the
backcountry having fun, becoming comfortable, and practicing
the best ways to take care of yourself in the outdoors.
What to Do When
Things Go Wrong
Following the seven priorities of
survival in a backcountry or wil-
derness location will give you a
good approach to acting effectively
when things don’t go as planned.
The priorities are listed at right,
in order of importance.
One way to avoid
panic is to
evaluate your
resources. What
do you and your
companions have
with you? How can
you use these
items to make
the most of your
situation and avoid
possible risks?
1. STOP.
2. Provide first aid.
3. Seek shelter.
4. Build a fire.
5. Signal for help.
6. Drink water.
7. Don’t worry
about food.


.Being Prepared as a Group
1. STOP
The moment you think you might be lost, stop immediately.
If you ever feel fear, stop immediately. Put your hands in your
pockets and take a deep breath. Look around and really see
what is happening.
If there are immediate dangers to avoid—a potential ava-
lanche, a capsized boat, an approaching bear—do what you
must to keep yourself and others safe. You might need to put
on your rain gear or step around a tree to get out of the wind.
You might also need to provide first aid for life-threatening inju-
ries or illnesses. Once that is done, you can begin to figure out
what to do next.
The letters of the word STOP hold a special meaning for
staying positive and beginning to take charge of a situation.
Stop
Think
Observe
Plan
Stop. At the beginning of a wilderness survival emergency, the
most important thing you can do is stop. Once you have taken
care of your immediate safety and that of others in your group,
then relax as best you can. Drink some water. Eat a snack. You
have time. You have resources. You have a good mind. Now is
the time to start using it. Stop.
Think. Assemble the group. Use your brain to figure out what
is really going on. If you think you are lost, study your map
and try to determine where you are. Look around for land-
marks. Note the contours of hills, ridges, or mountains, and
where you are in relation to streams or lakes.
If you don’t have a map, try to
remember where you could have
gotten off course. What was the last
landmark you positively identified?
In what direction did you travel from
there? If you are on a trail or a road,
can you follow it back to your starting
point? If you have left footprints in
snow, can you retrace your tracks?
Don’t go anywhere yet. There is
no rush. Stop and Think.
For many people,
the first reaction
to a survival
situation is to
panic. There is
fear of the
unknown and fear
that they don’t
know what to do
next. Without a
plan, whatever
they do while
panicking proba-
bly won’t be very
helpful and might,
in fact, make
matters worse.


Being Prepared as a Group.
Observe. Assess the immediate situation. Does anyone need
additional first aid? What are the weather conditions? Where is
a good place to take shelter? Inventory everything you have in
your pack and pockets, and look around to get a sense of the
natural resources nearby. What clothing do you have? How can
you improvise with what is available to make it suit your needs?
Don’t go anywhere yet. There is no rush. Stop, Think,
and Observe.
Plan. When you have figured out what your situation really is,
the group can put together a plan for what to do next. Build
your plan on what you have observed, what you have in the
way of equipment, what you can improvise from native materi-
als, and how you can keep yourself safe. Put into practice the
survival steps you have learned, and wait as calmly as you can
for help to arrive. Plan carefully and cautiously; don’t make
your situation worse by acting hastily.
If you left a written trip plan with a responsible person
before leaving home, your failure to return on time should trig-
ger a search effort. Most people are found within 24 hours of
becoming lost or encountering difficulties in the backcountry.
You could, if you had to, survive much longer. Stop, Think,
Observe, and Plan.
2. Provide First Aid
Treat life-threatening injuries and ill-
nesses immediately. As you begin
putting together your survival
plan, take the time to prop-
erly examine anyone who
has been hurt, and decide
on a course of action to
care for that person.
Play the “What
if?” game when
situations aren’t
emergencies. If
you became lost
here, what would
you do? What if
you needed a
shelter and had
no tent? What if
you needed to
start a fire and
had no matches?
The Wilderness Survival First Aid chapter in this pam-
phlet reviews a number of the injuries and illnesses
that might occur in the backcountry. Think about how
you would handle these ailments in a survival situation.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 23
.Being Prepared as a Group
3. Seek Shelter
The body’s core is a heat regulator. It does all
it can to keep you warm in cold weather and
cool in hot weather. If your body gets too hot,
you might suffer heat exhaustion or heatstroke.
If it gets too cold, hypothermia can set in.
Whatever the weather, if your body’s
core temperature rises or sinks more than
a few degrees from normal, you will find it
harder to think and more difficult to function
well. In the worst cases, the illnesses of
heat and cold can lead to unconsciousness
and even death.
Begin by assessing what you have for clothing. Rather than
wearing one heavy coat, putting on layers of clothing will allow
you to adjust the insulation around you to match the weather
conditions you face.
Clothing insulates best when it is dry. Protect the clothing
you are wearing from rain and snow by putting on any rain gear
you might have or by staying under shelter. Turn a plastic trash
bag into a raincoat by cutting slits in it for your arms and head.
Keep any clothing you aren’t wearing dry by stowing it in a safe
place such as your pack, a stuff sack, or a plastic trash bag.
SHELTER STRUCTURES
A shelter extends the effectiveness of your clothing by adding
another layer to your insulating and wind-blocking system.
As with all aspects of wilderness survival, assess the mate-
rials you have around you and make a plan to build an effec-
tive shelter. You will want to assemble a shelter that does the
job but that takes as little energy as possible for you to set up.
If you have a tent, you are in luck. A dining fly or other
tarp can also expand your possibilities. A plastic ground cloth
or a poncho with the hood tied closed can also serve as a shel-
ter. Pitch it close to the ground to block the wind.
Surviving long enough to be rescued can be summed
up as doing all you can to help your body maintain its
ideal temperature without using more energy than nec-
essary. That means giving it shelter.
In a desert, shelter
from the sun
can be essential
for survival.


24 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Being Prepared as a Group.
While we often think of a shelter as protection from rain
and wind, much body heat can be lost through direct contact
with the ground. Insulate the floor of your shelter with a sleep-
ing pad, if you have one, or by piling up evergreen boughs,
pine needles, or dry leaves. Sitting on your pack will
also help shield you from the chill of bare earth.
In a hot environment, find shade in a small
gully (see “Building a Shelter,” covered next)
or under a tree, large shrub, or rock out-
crop. (Check for snakes first, though!)
If you are rested, scoop out a hollow
in soft ground; it can be signifi-
cantly cooler beneath the surface.
Train your eyes to recognize
instant natural shelters. You
will be surprised at all that
nature provides if you look
closely enough.
Building a Shelter
Before building a shelter, think about how you will build it and
then locate the right site for it. The site should be relatively
level but sloping enough and high enough to provide adequate
drainage. The site should not be exposed to wind or drifting
sand or snow. Don’t choose a site under dead branches or close
to a dead tree that is still standing.
If you will be building your shelter from native materials,
is there a sufficient supply nearby? The closer the materials are,
the less energy you will use gathering them. Is there a plentiful
supply of firewood? Also, evaluate any risk of rockfalls, land-
slides, flood, avalanches, lightning, or any other hazard.
A good site will be near water—one of your priorities for
surviving—but not so near that you could be threatened by
To help conserve warmth, keep the interior size of a tarp
shelter small.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 25
.Being Prepared as a Group
flash floods, insects, shifting river courses, or high tides.
Visibility from the air should be considered for aircraft trying to
pinpoint your location, although if necessary you can set out a
signal in a nearby clearing that points to where you are.
A fallen tree or log; a large rock outcrop; an exposed root
base; thickly vegetated brush or small spruce, fir, or pine trees;
a snapped-over sapling or a lashed tripod—all can be used to
improvise a shelter. Always remember that a small shelter
means less work to build and less area to heat. Build the small-
est shelter that is adequate for your needs. A shelter 7 feet long,
3 feet wide, and 2 feet high is large enough for one person in
most survival situations. You will probably use it only a night
or two anyway.
If using a fallen tree, a rock, or a root base, first build a
framework by propping up branches that are 1 to 3 inches in
diameter against the leeward (downwind) side. Point the tips
of the branches downward to form a 60-degree angle with
the ground. This will help to shed rain. Then weave smaller
branches between the larger ones and work large pieces of
bark and boughs into this framework.
If you brought along a rescue
blanket or large sheet of
plastic, drape it over
the framework, and
anchor it with
rocks if necessary.
Pace yourself as
you work so that
you don’t perspire.
Your clothing will
not keep you
as warm if it
becomes wet
with sweat.


26 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Being Prepared as a Group.
If you are faced with a real survival situ-
ation, by all means use live branches. Your
life far outweighs any ecological detriment
caused by stripping off the boughs you need
for shelter. If you lack a ground cloth, you
will need a substantial mat of branches to
insulate your body from the ground as well.
Thickly vegetated brush or small spruce trees
can be bunched together and tied off at the
top to fashion a fine shelter. By weaving
other brush or branches into any gaps, you
can weatherproof your shelter to withstand
even a wind-driven downpour.
A snapped-over sapling is an effec-
tive way to start building your shel-
ter. Pull over a sapling so that it
snaps 4 to 5 feet above the ground,
but don’t break it off completely.
Let the top remain hinged to the
trunk with the tip resting on the
ground; you might need a large
rock to hold it down. Then
prop branches that are 1 to 3
inches in diameter on both
sides similar to the log or
rock shelter. Weave in
smaller branches, cover
it with material, and
pile on boughs.
Helping the Wilderness Survive You
Scouting America is a strong supporter of Leave No Trace methods of
camping, hiking, and all other outdoor activities. Follow the principles of
Leave No Trace whenever you are practicing survival skills. Do everything
you can to protect the environment, especially as you are building fires
and gathering materials for constructing shelters.
However, wilderness situations do not always allow you to practice
the low-impact techniques you have been taught. In a real emergency
situation, put the safety of yourself and other persons first and take what-
ever actions you must to survive. Think survival first, low-impact second.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 27
.Being Prepared as a Group
Snow Shelters. Snow can insulate you against the cold and
block the wind. The simplest snow shelter is a burrow dug or
tramped into a drift. That can provide you with a minimum of
protection while you consider your next steps.
More effective shelters include the tree pit, snow pit, snow
trench, and snow cave. In each case, you will need a tool for
digging and shaping snow. That might be a shovel, a cook pot,
a sturdy piece of bark, a stout stick, a license plate, or anything
else you can improvise into a tool.
Tree Pit. The area beneath the branches of
a large evergreen tree can be nearly free of
snow. Crawl underneath and form a small
living space. Bare earth radiates some heat,
so remove the snow from the tree pit floor
if you can. Use a foam pad protected by a
ground cloth as insulation beneath you.
A fir or spruce tree will shed snow
outside of the pit.
Snow Pit. Where snow is deep enough, you
can dig a long, narrow pit for an emergency
shelter. Form a roof by stretching a tarp or
ground cloth over the top of the trench.
Weigh down the edges with snow, stones,
or branches, then cover the roof with
several inches of snow to provide insulation.
Insulate the floor of the pit with a sleeping
pad if you have one and, when you are
inside, fill the entry with your pack or with
more snow to keep out the cold. Poke a
few ventilation holes near the entrance
and check them occasionally to be sure
that they remain clear.
Snow Trench. Where the snow is compacted
and you have a way to cut it into blocks,
shape a 36-inch-deep trench that tapers
from 24 inches at the top to 36 to 48 inches
at the base. Place the blocks on edge along
the sides of the trench, then lean them
against each other to form a pitched roof.
Insulate the trench floor with a sleeping pad. Snow trench
Tree pit
Snow pit


28 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Being Prepared as a Group.
Snow Cave. A snow cave provides terrific protection in the
worst winter storms. The drawback is that it takes a good deal
of time to construct. You will also need to be careful not to get
your clothing wet as you dig, either by sweating or by snow
melting and soaking into the fabric.
Start excavating a snow cave by burrowing a tunnel into
the side of a deep, stable drift, angling the tunnel upward for
several feet. Next, excavate a dome-shaped room at the top of
the tunnel, judging the thickness of the roof by watching from
the inside for a light blue color of the snow that indicates the
wall thickness is about right. Smooth the curved roof to remove
sharp edges that may cause moisture to drip onto your gear.
Finally, use a ski pole, shovel handle, or stick of wood to punch
several ventilation holes in the ceiling at a 45-degree angle to
the floor. Since the entrance tunnel slants upward, rising warm
air won’t escape through it and heavier cold air can’t seep in.
Mark Your Shelter Location
Whatever shelter you use, make its location obvious to rescuers. Set up
tents and tarps where they can be seen from aircraft and by rescuers on
the ground. When your shelter is hidden—a snow cave, for example, or the
space under an evergreen tree—use native materials or items you have on
hand to let others know where you are. Tie spare items of clothing to tree
branches. Make flags out of T-shirts or other cloth you can spare. Lay out
ground-to-air signals to attract the attention of rescuers in aircraft.
(See Ground-to-Air Visual Signal Code in this merit badge pamphlet.)


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 29
.Being Prepared as a Group
4. Build a Fire
In chilly and cold weather, a fire can be important for maintain-
ing body warmth, melting snow for water, drying out clothing,
signaling for help, and raising your spirits.
The importance of a fire means that you should spend
plenty of time getting it right. As with most survival skills,
practicing when you are not in an emergency situation is the
best way to become good at it. It is especially important to
practice using fire-lighting methods other than matches and
lighters—a magnifying lens, flint and steel, and fire by friction.
APPROPRIATE FIRES
A good way to think about a campfire is to consider it a tool to
be used for specific and important uses. If you come to the
backcountry prepared not to need a fire—carrying a stove and
fuel, for example—you can make an informed choice as to
whether a fire is appropriate. Be mindful of any temporary
bans against open flames in the area.
In a survival situation, you might not have a stove or the
clothing and gear to stay warm without a fire. Even so, take
time to build your fire in a manner that does not harm the
environment. You can do that by following the principles of
Leave No Trace.
SELECT A LEAVE NO TRACE CAMPFIRE SITE
A Leave No Trace campfire site has the following qualities:
1. Fire will cause no further negative impact on the land.
2. Fire cannot spread from it, and the area surrounding
the site will not be further degraded by the concen-
trated trampling of people cooking and socializing.
BUILDING A FIRE
Begin by gathering three kinds of flammable mate-
rial—tinder, kindling, and fuel—and arranging them
into a fire lay.
Tinder is fine, dry material that will burst
into flame at the touch of a match. Pine needles,
the inner bark of dead branches, weed fluff, dry
grasses, and slivers shaved with a knife from a
stick all are good sources of tinder. Gather a
double handful.
In practicing
wilderness
survival skills,
build fires only
where they are
allowed by local
land management
regulations. In a
real-life survival
situation, use
good judgment
and extreme
care whenever
you decide to
light a fire.
Tinder and kindling in place for
a tepee fire lay


30 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Being Prepared as a Group.
Kindling is material that will burn with a little encourage-
ment. Twigs no thicker than a pencil are the easiest to find. You
will need a small armload.
Fuel is dead and downed wood no bigger than your wrist
that you will use to keep your blaze burning. Place fuel wood
near the fire lay and protect it with a ground sheet or dining fly.
In wet weather, look for small, dry branches near the bases
of trees where larger branches above them have kept off the
rain. You can also use a pocketknife to cut away the damp
outer layers of a piece of fuel wood until you get down to dry
shavings for tinder and kindling. If you happen to have one,
use an ax to split wood and expose the dry interior.
MAKING THE FIRE LAY
Prepare a fire lay the right way and your chances
of getting it to burn will be high. Then, arrange
a good amount of each flammable material in
such a way that a flame touched to the base of
the tinder will burn up through it, ignite the
kindling, and then spread into the fuel. A tepee
fire lay works especially well.
Place a big, loose handful of tinder in the
center of your fire site. Mound plenty of kin-
dling over the tinder. Then, arrange small and
medium-sized sticks of fuelwood around the
kindling as if they were the poles of a tepee.
Leave an opening in the “tepee” on the side
the wind is blowing against so that air can
reach the middle of the fire.
FIRE-LIGHTING METHODS
When the fire lay is complete and you have
a large supply of additional kindling and fuel
wood on hand, ease a flame underneath the
tinder. The flame can come from a match or
lighter, or can be generated by a magnifying
lens, flint and steel, or a fire by friction set.
In survival situations, gather three or four times as much
tinder, kindling, and fuel wood as you would normally
want. That way you won’t have to run off to gather more
flammable material once the fire is burning.
Building a tepee fire lay


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 31
Matches and Lighters. Preserve your matches by
taking plenty of time to prepare your fire before
you light it. By ensuring that the tinder catches fire
on your first try, you can save the rest of your
matches for future fires.
Matches can be carried in a waterproof match case,
an empty plastic aspirin bottle with a tight lid, or a resealable
plastic bag. If you have a butane lighter, guard it against
moisture and cold by keeping it tucked inside a pocket close
to your body. Bring it out only when your fire lay is complete
and you are ready to ignite the tinder.
Magnifying Lens. On a clear day you might be able to focus
sunlight through a curved lens such as that found on the base-
plates of some compasses and in eyeglasses, a magnifying glass,
camera lenses, binoculars, and telescopes. In some cases, you
might need to remove the lens from the instrument in which
you found it.
Hold the lens so that the sunlight streaming through
it is concentrated down to a bright pinpoint on your
tinder. In a few moments it will generate enough heat
to cause the tinder to burn.
Tinder for Lighting Fires Without Matches
Very fine tinder is
essential for lighting
fires with a magnifying
lens, flint and steel, or
fire by friction. In the
field, try shredding
the dry inner bark of
a cottonwood, elm,
or cedar tree, or
gathering the fluff
from a mouse nest
or chipmunk burrow.
You can use lint from
a clothes dryer, too. Use caution with dryer lint—it is highly flammable.
.


32 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Being Prepared as a Group.
Flint and Steel. Striking one hard object against another can
sometimes produce sparks. In the backcountry, the most likely
objects are a pocketknife and a piece of flint—a dark, shiny
stone that fractures easily.
Form your fine tinder (dryer lint works well) into a bird’s
nest shape the size of a softball. Holding the flint just above the
tinder, strike it with the steel to direct the sparks into it. Use a
downward motion to strike the steel against an edge of the flint.
Nurse a spark into a flame by blowing on it very gently. When
the tinder bursts into flame, and the kindling catches fire, push
it underneath your fire lay.
You may wish
to purchase a
specially prepared
flint rod to include
in your emergency
kit. The wheel and
flint on an empty
lighter also can
produce sparks.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 33
.Being Prepared as a Group
Fire by Friction. A skill of old-time Scouts was making a fire
using a bow and spindle. For a bowstring, you can use a piece
of nylon cord or a shoestring, or a cord off a tent, pack, or tarp.
The spindle should be made of very dry hardwood—oak, for
example. The hand block with a depression carved into it to fit
the top of the spindle should also be made of hardwood. The
fireboard is a softer wood that is also dry—cottonwood is a
good one to choose. Whittle a notch into the fireboard so that
the spindle fits into it, then tuck some very fine tinder beneath
the notch.
Twist the bowstring once around the spindle, then hold the
spindle upright with one end against the notch in the fireboard.
Kneel down and put one foot on the fireboard to keep it from
moving. Draw the bow back and forth to twirl the spindle,
holding it steady with the hand block. Ideally, the friction
created as the spindle turns against the fireboard will cause
an ember to form next to the tinder. Gently blow on the
ember until the tinder bursts into flame.
Starting a fire without the help of a match or lighter is
an important and enjoyable skill to master, but it requires
practice. Try out different methods during normal
campouts so that you become comfortable with finding
and using the right materials. In emergency situations,
you will know just what to do.
HAND BLOCK
SPINDLE
BOW
FIREBOARD


34 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Being Prepared as a Group.
5. Signal for Help
Signaling for help can be very important if you have become
lost or if you or others in your group are injured and cannot be
moved. Think about where you are, how you might be seen,
and what you have on hand to make yourself and your location
more visible to others. Consider any and all of the following
signaling methods.
Noise. Recognized signals of distress include three blasts on a
whistle, three shouts, three bursts from a boat air horn, or three
of any other sounds delivered every minute or two.
Electronic Devices. Mobile phones are useful in areas with
coverage, but many backcountry areas are out of reach of a
cell tower. If possible, research coverage before the trip and
carry emergency contact numbers for park ranger stations,
local sheriff departments, and other emergency services.
Remember to start out with fully charged batteries, and carry
extra batteries with you.
If you have a means of electronic communication, try to
use it as soon as is practical after assessing your situation and
dealing with first aid or other immediate dangers. The sooner
others know of your situation, the sooner they can provide
assistance, even if it takes a while to reach your location.
Mobile phones may have limited service in remote locations.
Before you leave, find out whether the area you will be visiting
has reliable service.
Call 911 only in
case of actual
emergencies.
Be prepared
to give the
operator complete
information about
the nature of the
emergency,
including your
location and your
wireless number.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 35
.Being Prepared as a Group
Staying Found
One of the secrets of safe wilderness travel is the use of thumbnail
navigation. This technique demands that you be constantly aware of
your position. It involves carrying a topographic map of the area that
is readily accessible (in your pants pocket rather than your pack, for
example), and referring to it constantly.
As you hike, you should continuously try to match up features around
you with points on the map. Periodically, you will come to features (for
example, a mountain summit, or a bridge over a stream) that allow you
to pinpoint your exact position with precision. In the event that you
become disoriented, check your map and determine how long it has
been since you passed one of these “exact” points on the map. If you
have a rough idea of your trail pace, you can then figure how far from
this point you could possibly be. This should give you a pretty clear
idea of your general position on the map.


36 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Mirrors and Lights. When the sun is shining, the flash of light
reflected with a signal mirror can be seen for miles. Aiming it
takes practice. Sight a target through the hole in the center of
the mirror or by looking just over the mirror’s top edge. Hold
your extended arm in line with the target and adjust the angle
of the mirror so that reflected light illuminates fingers of your
hand raised to form a “V” through which you can see the
target. If you don’t have a signal mirror, you might be able to
use a piece of shiny flat metal from an aircraft or remove a rear-
view mirror from a motor vehicle, or even use the shiny side of
a CD or DVD.
At night, use a flashlight to send groups of three flashes
in the direction where you believe rescuers might be able to
see them.
Flares can be found on airplanes and in some watercraft
and motor vehicles and can be effective if you have a rescue
aircraft in sight. They are visible for only a short time, though,
so save them for the right moment.
Color and Motion. Hanging brightly colored clothing or camp-
ing gear on tree branches can catch the rescuers’ attention.
Flags, banners, and contrasting colors can be part of your sig-
naling efforts. If you can see rescuers, wave a shirt over your
head or attach it to a pole and wave it as a flag.
Fire and Smoke. A fire will probably already be part of
your survival strategy. The light from it might attract attention
at night, and smoke can be seen during the day. Experiment
with ways to make a fire smoky by adding pitchy wood,
damp leaves, branches, ferns, grasses, and other vegetation
to the flames without actually putting out the fire.
Signaling with a mirror


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 37
.Being Prepared as a Group
Ground-to-Air Signals. A simple set of ground-to-air signals
will allow you to communicate with searchers flying overhead.
Make your symbols as big as you can. Use whatever is on hand
to construct symbols that can be seen easily from the air—
rocks, overturned sod, piles of branches, and pieces of clothing
and equipment. Where snow covers the ground, use your feet
to stomp out the shapes of the symbols. Lining the shapes
with branches, ashes, soil, or other dark material can make
the symbols more visible.
When rescuers arrive by helicopter, stand still and wait
until the aircraft lands. A crew member will come to you or
provide other guidance about what you should do. Follow his
or her instructions exactly.
Shadows. Lay out your ground-to-air signals with an eye
toward the sun and you can take advantage of the shadows
cast by logs, rocks, and the sides of trenches to make the
signals more visible. Orienting the longer legs of signals in a
north-south direction will create the most effective shadows,
especially early in the morning and late in the afternoon.
As you work, pace yourself to conserve energy and avoid
sweating as you lay out your ground-to-air signals.
REQUIRE
ASSISTANCE
REQUIRE
MEDICAL
ASSISTANCE
NO YES PROCEEDING
IN THIS
DIRECTION
Ground-to-Air Visual Signal Code


38 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Being Prepared as a Group.
6. Drink Water
It bears repeating: Drink plenty of water.
Drink plenty of water. Drink plenty of water.
You can survive for days without food, but in
hot weather without water, only hours.
Dehydration happens in cold weather, too,
even though you may not feel as thirsty. The
best rule is to drink plenty of water—enough
so that your urine is clear—whenever you are
in the outdoors.
Ideally you will be able to find water
where you are—from a lake, a stream,
or melting snow, or by guiding rainwater down
a tarp or tent fly and into a container. Water
may have collected in depressions in rocks, in
the crotches of trees, or in seeps along cliffs.
TREATING WATER
Boiling. The surest means of making your water safe is by
boiling it. Use a pot or other metal container on a stove or
over a fire and bring the water to a full boil.
Chemical Treatment. Water-treatment tablets contain iodine or
chlorine to kill waterborne bacteria and viruses.
They are effective and easy to use. An emergency
survival kit should have a supply of water-treatment
tablets.
Filtering. Most backcountry filters are simple hand-
held pumps used to force water through a screen
with pores so small that bacteria and protozoa can-
not get through. The finer the screen, the more
effective the filter. Information provided with new
filters describes their use, maintenance, and the
degree of filtration they can provide.
Natural Filtration. If you have a water source (run-
ning or standing) you can dig a hole deeper than
the level of the water source and approximately 18
inches from the water source. The hole will begin to
fill with water. That water will be filtered by the
sand/dirt between the water source and the hole so is
safer to drink than directly from the water source.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 39
.Being Prepared as a Group
7. Don’t Worry About Food
Being hungry is not very pleasant, but on the list of survival
priorities, it is not very high. Keeping warm in cold weather
and cool in hot weather, finding shelter, drinking plenty of
water, and signaling your location are all more important than
finding something to eat.
Once you have taken care of the necessities of survival,
you can give some thought to sources of food. You may have
the ingredients for camp meals in your pack.
Experts in wilderness survival can tell which plants are
safe to eat and which might cause intestinal stress or even poi-
soning. Unless you are absolutely sure of the identity of a plant
and know it is safe to eat, it’s best to leave vegetation alone.
The same is true of most wildlife. A length of nylon line and a
hook can be useful in using insects or worms to catch a fish or
two, but in most cases the energy you burn in trying to capture
an animal and prepare it to be safely eaten would be better
used improving your shelter, gathering water, and taking care
of other survival priorities.
Allow muddy
water to stand
in a cook pot,
bucket, or other
container until
the silt settles to
the bottom. Dip
the clear water
off the top and
remove any
remaining organic
debris by straining
the water through
a bandanna or
T-shirt into a
clean container.
Treat it with a
filter or water-
treatment tablets,
or by bringing it
to a boil.
Treat any water you collect before drinking it, but if
that isn’t possible, drink it anyway. In survival
situations, the danger of becoming dehydrated
outweighs the possibility of becoming ill.





WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 41
.Survival Challenges
Survival Challenges
Certain environmental conditions can pose special challenges
for wilderness survivors. Planning ahead for what you would
do in each of the following settings will help you prepare to
make good decisions.
Cold and Snow
Cold weather brings with it the very real danger of hypother-
mia. The temperature does not need to be all that low for
hypothermia to be a concern. A cool, rainy day, especially if
the wind is blowing, can be especially worrisome.
Do all you can to keep yourself warm and dry. Watch those
around you for signs that they are becoming chilled. Take steps
to find shelter and, if possible, to light a fire.
Snow can also make survival more difficult by burying
firewood and the native materials that could be used for mak-
ing or improving shelters. It is easy to lose gear in the snow.
If snow gets into your clothing, it will melt and can chill you.
On the other hand, snow can be an effective resource for
building a shelter. It may be as simple as a depression dug into a
snowbank so that you can get out of the wind. With more time
and energy, you might dig a snow cave or construct a snow
trench to create a shelter that will insulate you from the cold.
Be sure to drink plenty of fluids even though you might
not feel thirsty. Melt snow over a stove or campfire. If the day
is sunny, try laying out a dark-colored plastic trash bag or
ground cloth, spreading some snow on it, and letting the sun-
light melt it. Shape the snow underneath the plastic to form a
depression that captures the water and allows you to dip a cook
pot or water bottle into it.
For more on
recognizing and
dealing with
hypothermia, see
the Wilderness
Survival First Aid
chapter at the
end of this merit
badge pamphlet.
For more on using snow as a building material,
see the information on shelter structures in the
“Being Prepared as a Group” chapter.


42 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Survival Challenges.
Wet Forests
While forests can offer an abundance of materials for making
shelters and building campfires, they can also be challenging,
especially if the weather is wet. The shade of a forest floor can
feel chilly, and dampness can make it seem even colder. As in
other settings, do what you must to keep yourself and others
dry and warm, and be on guard against hypothermia.
Dense forests can make signaling to rescuers difficult. You
might need to move a short distance to a meadow, stream
bank, or other open area visible from an aircraft. Consider your
options carefully, though, before changing locations. Mark your
route clearly in case you need to find your way back.
Hot and Dry Deserts
While the greatest challenge of desert
survival might be staying cool during
the day, nights are sometimes cold
enough in arid regions for you to need
clothing, shelter, and perhaps a fire to
keep warm. Rest in a high, shady spot
during the day, then complete neces-
sary activities in the cool of the evening
or early morning. Wear sun protection
if you have it, including long sleeves
and a hat. A hat or some type of head
cover will help beat the heat, too.
Wind
Wind can make other challenges more difficult to overcome. In
hot weather, a wind might help keep you cooler, but it can also
sap away moisture and cause you to need to drink water more
often. In cold weather, wind can blow warm air away from
your body and cause the temperature to seem colder than
what is indicated on a thermometer. A steady wind can be
exhausting as it hammers away at your energy and morale.
Protect yourself from the wind by wearing a
windproof outer layer—a jacket, rain gear, or even a
tarp or tent rain fly. Seek shelter on the calm side
of a boulder or large tree. If the weather is chilly
or cold, watch for any signs of hypothermia.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 43
.Survival Challenges
Oceans, Lakes, and Rivers
Emergencies on water often begin when
a watercraft capsizes or when someone
falls from shore or from a boat. If that is
the case, the first concern is to protect
those in the water from drowning. They
will need to get to dry land, get back
into their watercraft, or stay afloat until
help arrives.
If you are in cold water very near
the shore, get everyone out of the water
as soon as possible to help avoid hypo-
thermia. If you capsize far from shore,
try to get as much of your body out of
the water as possible by climbing on the
capsized craft. If that is not possible, con-
serve energy and body heat by floating
with your personal flotation device and
clothing on, your head positioned so that
you can breathe, and your legs drawn up close to your trunk.
Huddle together with others if you are not alone.
A capsized canoe, boat, or other watercraft, even if dam-
aged, might stay afloat. It is also more visible than a person
alone in the water. Canoes and small boats can sometimes be
righted, but don’t waste much energy in the effort. You can
climb into a swamped boat and it should still keep you on the
surface. If that isn’t possible, hang onto the side of the boat and
use it to help you rest and keep your head above water.
When a survival situation involves a life raft, look for stor-
age compartments containing an emergency kit that might con-
tain first-aid supplies, water, signaling devices, and emergency
food. Follow the instructions included with the kit.
To ride out the rapids in a river before
swimming to safety or catching a rescue
line, go downstream feetfirst with your
legs acting as shock absorbers to fend
off rocks. Use a backstroke to maneuver
past obstacles, and watch for eddies that
might protect you.
If you are stranded at sea or on the coastline of an
ocean, don’t drink the salt water. The mineral content
will cause your body to dehydrate more quickly than if
you drank no seawater at all.
Instead, stay in the shade to keep from sweating
away more moisture than necessary. On shore, try to
locate streams, springs, and other sources of fresh
water. If you are stranded on a watercraft, be ready to
collect water from rain or morning dew.
Risks from
emergencies on
the water can be
greatly reduced
if everyone wears
an approved
personal flotation
device, even for
short boat rides.
Remember that
a PFD is required
for all Scouting
America
activities afloat.


44 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Survival Challenges.
Surviving in the Water
A. If you must stay in the water, your chances of survival are greater if
you assume the HELP or huddle position, depending on whether or not
you have others with you. In a cold-water situation, float motionless with
your PFD and clothes on, your head out of the water, and your legs drawn
up close to your trunk.
B. To help conserve energy in cold-water situations, use the huddle posi-
tion if you are not alone.
C. If your boat capsizes in a river, don’t fight the current. Get on your back
with your feet pointed downstream. This way, it will be your feet that
strike against rocks rather than your head. Use a backstroke to help main-
tain your position in the water, and the current will soon carry you into
shallow water.
One of the most common causes of small-boat accidents is overloading.
Know what your boat can safely hold and never exceed the limit.
Heat escape lessening posture (HELP) Huddle together with sides touching.
A
C
B
Swim or float downstream feetfirst. Stay with your boat unless you are
very close to shore.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 45
.Survival Challenges
Motoring (On-Road or Off-Road Vehicles)
The ease of traveling into many backcountry regions by motor-
ized vehicle can cause people to forget to take steps to prepare
for wilderness survival. A snowmobile, all-terrain vehicle,
motorbike, or even a four-wheel-drive SUV can seem very safe
because it can get us places quickly. However, should a vehicle
run out of fuel or break down, you can find yourself every bit
as stranded as if you had hiked to a remote location. Let some-
one know where you are going and when you will return. Be
clear about your route so that if you need to be found, search-
ers will know where to look.
Many vehicles can be equipped with survival equipment
so that you will always have what you need. Include a first-aid
kit, extra food and clothing, and basic repair items for the
vehicle itself.
If a vehicle you are traveling in does break down, stay close
to it. Three of anything—three blinks of the headlights, three
honks of the horn—repeated every few minutes will tell others
in the vicinity that you are in trouble.
Conserve battery power by using the lights
and horn just for signaling.
In winter conditions, stay in the vehicle.
Turn the engine on every 20 minutes or so
to briefly warm up the interior. Leaving the
dome light on at night will not use much
battery power and will make it easier for
rescuers to spot you.
Hike out only if a main roadway is
nearby and there is no doubt you can reach
it. Your decision might be influenced by the
fact that someone in your group is sick or
injured and must have medical help soon.
Flying
Among the more dramatic survival situations are those created
when an airplane goes down. Pilots file flight plans and aircraft
carry locator beacons to help make it easier to locate and rescue
survivors of plane crashes and forced landings, as well as those
involved in parasailing and skydiving accidents. Those who are
stranded with a downed aircraft should stay close to the wreckage.
To increase the possibility for survival, passengers in
private aircraft should pack extra clothing. The weather might
be warm when the plane lifts off but much colder in the high
country along the aircraft’s route.
If your vehicle breaks down, signal for
help with headlights, emergency flash-
ers, and horn blasts, repeated in sets of
three every few minutes.
Be prepared for
the worst weather
that could occur.
Have everyone
traveling in the
vehicle pack
extra clothes for
the trip.





WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 47
.Protecting Yourself in the Wilderness
Protecting Yourself
in the Wilderness
Making good choices to protect yourself from insects, reptiles,
and wild animals is one of the many challenges of wilderness
survival. Keep this information in mind on any hike, campout,
or other situation where you are sharing the backcountry with
wildlife, small and large.
Insects
Mosquitoes, chiggers, black flies, and other biting insects can
make you miserable in the outdoors, and that can threaten
morale. If you have it, use insect repellent. Wear a long-sleeved
shirt, long pants, and a hat. Apply the insect repellent to the
seams of your clothing (sleeve ends, belt line, collar, pant-leg
openings.) Tie a bandanna around your face or use a spare
T-shirt to protect your head. Guard your hands with gloves or
pull a pair of socks over them. Try smoothing a layer of mud
on exposed skin. Build a fire and stay close to the smoke.
Consider moving to higher ground that might be breezier and
less infested with bugs.
For information on
treating insect
and reptile bites,
see the Wilderness
Survival First Aid
chapter in
this merit
badge pamphlet.
FEEDING TICK
ENGORGED TICK
BROWN RECLUSE
SPIDER


48 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Reptiles
While snakes are common in many parts of the country, snake-
bites are rare and seldom result in death. Snakes try to avoid
humans, usually striking only when cornered.
The bite of a nonvenomous snake causes only minor
puncture wounds. The bite of a venomous snake may cause
the victim to feel sharp, burning pain. The area around the
bite may swell and become discolored. However, a venomous
snake does not always inject venom when it bites. The best
advice is to treat every snakebite as if it were inflicted by
a venomous snake.
Use a hiking stick to poke among stones and brush ahead
of you when you walk through areas where snakes are common.
Watch where you put your hands as you collect firewood or
climb over rocks and logs.
A hiking stick does double duty when you walk through
places where snakes are common. Walk slowly and use the
stick to lead you.
Before you go,
find out what
kinds of wildlife
inhabit the area
you plan to visit.
Doing so will help
you be prepared
in case you have
a close encounter
with a predator or
other wild animal.
Coral snake
.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 49
.Protecting Yourself in the Wilderness
Predatory Animals
Be especially aware of the kinds of predatory animals you might
meet during your adventures. Wolves, coyotes, and cougars (or
panthers and pumas) are curious. So, if you happen upon such
an animal, face the creature and slowly retreat from the area. Do
not approach the animal, run, or play dead. Make yourself as
“big” as possible by waving your arms and clothing above your
head. Make a lot of noise. If you have no escape or become cor-
nered, throw rocks and sticks. Remember, no matter what kind
of wild animal, give all wildlife a wide berth—especially young
animals and their mother.
Bears. Bears are part of many
backcountry ecosystems. The
same guidelines Scouts follow
to keep bears and themselves
safe during outdoor adventures
can be adapted during survival
emergencies to allow people
and bears to share the same
wilderness areas without inci-
dent. You might need to adapt
some of these guidelines to
fit the circumstances of a
survival situation.
Bear-Safety Checklist
While hiking, alert bears to your approach by making noise. Never
approach or provoke a bear. If you encounter a bear, do not run or
shout. Stay calm, back away, and avoid eye contact with the bear.
Set up your sleeping area at least 200 feet away from where you will
cook and eat.
Allow no smellables—food-soiled clothing, deodorant and
antiperspirant, soap—in sleeping tents.
Clean up and pack out any spilled food, food particles, and campsite trash.
Use a bear bag, bear box, or bear canister to protect all
unattended smellables.
Dispose of dishwater at least 200 feet from your campsite and
sleeping area.
Wash early in the day. Avoid using scented lotions, soaps, deodorants,
or shampoos.
Change into clean sleeping clothes before going to bed.
American black bear





WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 51
.Wilderness Survival First Aid
Wilderness Survival
First Aid
This merit badge pamphlet has explained a method of surviving
wilderness emergencies by addressing the following steps.
1. STOP (Stop, Think, Observe, Plan).
2. Provide first aid.
3. Find shelter.
4. Build a fire.
5. Signal for help.
6. Drink water.
7. Don’t worry about food.
Providing first-aid care is high on the list, especially if you
or someone with you has suffered serious injuries or illness.
The first-aid emergencies described below are those that you
might encounter in the backcountry. The treatments are ways
to manage these risks until help can arrive.
You can also prepare for backcountry emergencies by
completing training in caring for injured and ill persons in
remote settings. Among the courses available in various parts
of the country are those for American Red Cross Wilderness
First Aid Basic, Wilderness First Responder, Wilderness
Emergency Medical Technician, and Mountaineering Oriented
First Aid. Check with your Scouting America local council for
opportunities in your area.
There is always
more you can
learn about first
aid. The Scouts
BSA handbook,
Fieldbook, and
First Aid merit
badge pamphlet
give additional
information about
first aid. Earning
the First Aid merit
badge is a good
way to continue to
build your skills.
The first-aid treatments described here are those that
can be used under ideal circumstances. Wilderness
survival situations might make it necessary for you
to improvise. In any case, do the best you can with
the knowledge and the resources you have at hand.


52 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Wilderness Survival First Aid.
Hypothermia
Hypothermia occurs when a person’s body is losing more
heat than it can generate. It is a danger for anyone who is not
dressed warmly enough, though simple exposure to cold is
seldom the only cause. Dehydration is a common factor. Wind,
damp clothing, hunger, and exhaustion can compound the dan-
ger. The temperature doesn’t have to be below freezing. A
lightly dressed hiker caught in a cool, windy rain shower can be
at great risk. So is a swimmer too far out in chilly water or
immersed too long.
A person experiencing hypothermia might feel cold and
numb; become tired, anxious, irritable, and increasingly
clumsy; have slurred speech; shiver uncontrollably; make poor
decisions; and lose consciousness.
Treating Hypothermia. There are some general guidelines
for treating a victim of hypothermia. For starters, prevent the
victim from getting colder and, if necessary, use any or all of
the following methods to help the body warm again to its
normal temperature.
• If the person is fully conscious and can drink, offer small
amounts of warm liquids (cocoa, soup, fruit juices, water).
• Move the person into the shelter of a building or a tent and
into dry, warm clothes.
The first step in treating hypothermia is preventing the victim from getting any colder.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 53
.Wilderness Survival First Aid
• Zip the person into a dry sleeping bag. Cover the head with
a warm hat or sleeping bag hood.
• Provide water bottles filled with warm fluid to hold in the
armpit and groin areas.
If hypothermia is advanced, aid in rewarming the victim.
Be sure to watch the person closely, and be ready to administer
other first aid if necessary. Seek medical care.
Frostbite
A frostbite victim may complain of pain on the ears,
nose, fingers, or feet and then numbness, but some-
times the victim won’t notice anything. You may
see grayish-white patches on the skin—a sure
sign of frostbite.
Treating Frostbite. Get the victim into
a tent or other shelter, then warm the
injury—and keep it warm. If an ear or
cheek is frozen, remove a glove and
warm the injury with the palm of
your hand. Slip a frostbitten hand
under your clothing and tuck it
beneath an armpit. Treat frozen
toes by putting the victim’s bare
feet against the warm skin of your
belly. Avoid rubbing frostbitten
flesh, as that may damage tissue
and skin.
You can also warm a frozen part
by holding it in warm—never hot—
running water. Or wrap it in a dry blan-
ket. Have the victim exercise injured fingers
or toes, and do not let the injured area freeze
again. Get the victim to a doctor.
When you suspect someone is suffering from hypothermia, challenge
the person to walk, heel to toe, a 30-foot line scratched on the ground.
If the person shows unsteadiness, loss of balance, or other signs of
disorientation, take immediate action to get the victim warm and dry.
Your own body heat can help treat frostbite.


54 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Wilderness Survival First Aid.
Dehydration
Water is essential for nearly every bodily function, including
digestion, respiration, brain activity, producing heat, and
staying cool. A person who gives off more water than he
or she takes in risks becoming dehydrated. The first sign of
dehydration usually is dark urine. Other signs can include
weariness, headache and body aches, and confusion. Heat
exhaustion, heatstroke, and hypothermia may all be caused
in part by dehydration.
Treating Dehydration. Protect yourself from dehydration by
drinking plenty of fluids. That is easy to do on hot summer
days when you are thirsty, but it is just as important in cold
weather when you may not feel thirsty. Drink enough so that
your urine stays clear and lightly colored, not dark amber.
Heat Exhaustion
Heat exhaustion can be brought on by a combination of
dehydration and a warm environment. It is not uncommon
during outdoor activities conducted in hot weather, especially
if participants are not fully acclimated to the conditions.
Symptoms can include pale and clammy skin caused by
heavy sweating, nausea and tiredness, dizziness and fainting,
headache, muscle cramps, and weakness.
Victims of heat exhaustion should be cooled down as quickly
as possible.
Be sure you stay
well-hydrated
even when
conditions are
cold outside.


.Wilderness Survival First Aid
Treating Heat Exhaustion. Place the person in the shade and
encourage the victim to drink fluids, ideally cool water. Hasten
the cooling process by applying wet cloths to the skin and then
fanning the person. Activities can resume when the person feels
better, though it can take a day or more for full recovery.
Heatstroke
Heatstroke occurs when a person’s core temperature rises to
life-threatening levels (above 105 degrees). Dehydration and
overexertion in hot environments can be factors. Symptoms
can include hot, sweaty, red skin; confusion and disorientation;
and a rapid pulse.
Treating Heatstroke. Get the patient under qualified medical
attention as quickly as possible, monitoring the person closely
during evacuation to guard against a relapse. The person’s
temperature must be lowered quickly and hydration restored.
Move the victim to a shady location and loosen tight clothing.
If the person is able to drink, give small amounts of cool water.
Pour water on the person and further cool by fanning. If you
have them, wrap ice packs in a thin barrier (such as a thin
towel) and place them under the armpits and against the
neck and groin.
Sunburn
Sunburn is a common but potentially serious result of overex-
posure to the sun. Long-term exposure can result in skin dam-
age and increase the risk of skin cancer. In survival situations,
serious or extensive sunburn can be painful enough to limit a
person’s ability to function well.
Treating Sunburn. The best treatment for sunburn
is prevention. Limit your exposure to the sun,
wear loose-fitting clothing that covers your
arms and legs, and wear a broad-brimmed
hat to shade your neck, ears, and face.
Protect exposed skin by liberally applying
sunscreen with a sun protection
factor (SPF) of at least 15; reapply it
often. If you have no sunscreen, stay
in the shade as much as possible,
especially in the middle of the day
when the sun’s rays can be most
damaging. Smoothing a layer of
mud on exposed skin can offer
some protection, too.
WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 55


56 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Wilderness Survival First Aid.
Minor Injuries
Minor cuts and scrapes usually require only cleaning and
disinfecting with soap and water. Allow them to heal in the air,
or cover them lightly with a dry, sterile dressing or bandage to
help prevent infection. Unless a cut is serious, bleeding proba-
bly will stop on its own or with slight pressure on the wound.
If a wound is so severe that it does not stop bleeding
readily, apply direct and firm pressure using a sterile dressing
or compress. It may help to raise the injured limb (if no bones
are broken) above heart level. If the bleeding is prolonged, treat
for shock and seek medical attention immediately.
Treating Blisters
A hot spot is a warning that a blister may be forming. Treat a
hot spot or blister as soon as you notice it. Gel pads can be
taped directly over a hot spot or blister to reduce friction and
speed healing. Follow the instructions on the package.
To treat a hot spot or blister with moleskin, cut the mole-
skin slightly larger than the shape of the blister. Used together,
a gel pad and moleskin can provide maximum relief for hot
spots and blisters. Change bandages every day to help keep
wounds clean and avoid infection.
Tick, Chigger, and Spider Bites and Stings
The bites or stings of insects, ticks, chiggers, and
spiders can be painful. Some may cause infection.
Treating Stings. To treat bee stings, scrape away the stinger
with the edge of a knife blade. Don’t squeeze the sac attached
to the stinger—that might force more venom into the skin. Use
an ice pack to reduce pain and swelling.
Treating Tick Bites. Ticks are small, blood-sucking creatures
that bury their heads in the skin. Protect yourself whenever you
are in tick-infested woodlands and fields by wearing long pants
and a long-sleeved shirt. Button your collar and tuck the cuffs
of your pants into your boots or socks. Inspect yourself daily,
especially the hairy parts of your body, and immediately
remove any ticks you find.
Honeybee
People with
diabetes should
seek professional
medical care
for their blisters,
which can quickly
become infected.


Black
widow
spider
Anaphylactic Shock
In rare cases, stings or bites of insects can cause
anaphylactic shock, a condition that restricts breath-
ing passages and requires immediate treatment by a
physician or a person trained in emergency first aid.
People who are allergic to peanuts, shellfish, and
certain other foods can have similar reactions if
they ingest those items.
Travelers who know they are susceptible to ana-
phylactic reactions (and anyone dealing with asthma)
should consult with their physicians to prepare them-
selves for the outdoors with strategies and treatment
kits, and should share that information with the leaders
of their groups. For example, the emergency kits carried
by people who know they might suffer from anaphy-
lactic shock often include an EpiPen® for injecting
a measured dose of epinephrine. If you have any
medical conditions, let others in your party know so
they will know how to respond in case of emergency.
EpiPen®
Victims of spider
bites should be
treated for shock
and be seen by a
physician as soon
as possible.
If a tick has attached itself, grasp it with tweezers close to
the skin and gently pull until it comes loose. Don’t squeeze,
twist, or jerk the tick, as that may leave its mouth parts buried
in the skin. Wash the wound with soap and water, and apply
antiseptic. After dealing with a tick, thoroughly wash your hands.
Treating Chigger Bites. Chiggers are almost invisible. They
burrow into skin pores, causing itching and small welts. Try not
to scratch chigger bites. You may find some relief by covering a
chigger bite with calamine lotion or by dabbing it with clear
fingernail polish or mud.
Treating Spider Bites. The bite of a female black widow spider
can cause redness and sharp pain at the wound site. The victim
may suffer sweating, nausea and vomiting, stomach pain and
cramps, severe muscle pain and spasms, and shock. Breathing
may become difficult and convulsions may occur.
The bite of a brown recluse spider might not hurt right
away, but within two to eight hours there can be pain, redness,
and swelling at the wound. An open sore is likely to develop.
The victim may suffer fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, joint pain,
and a faint rash.


58 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Snakebites
If you are bitten by a snake, assume that it is venomous unless
it can be absolutely identified as nonvenomous. Learn to recog-
nize venomous varieties to know when there is danger and
what action to take.
Two types of venomous snakes are found in the United
States. Pit vipers (rattlesnakes, copperheads, cottonmouths)
have triangular-shaped heads with pits on each side in
front of the eyes. Coral snakes have black snouts and
bands of red and yellow separated by bands of
black. Pit viper venom affects
the circulatory system;
coral snakes inject a
powerful venom that
works on the victim’s
nervous system.
Treating Nonvenomous Snakebites. The bite of a non-
venomous snake requires only ordinary first aid for small
wounds—scrub with soap and water, then treat with an
antiseptic. Snakes are not warm-blooded and so cannot
carry rabies.
Treating Venomous Snakebites. Get the victim under medical
care as soon as possible so that physicians can neutralize the
venom. A person who has been bitten by a venomous snake
might not be affected by the venom for an hour or more.
Within that time, the closer to medical attention you can get
the victim, the better off the person will be. The victim might
be able to walk, but carrying the victim also might be an
option. Before setting out, do the following.
• Encourage the patient to stay calm; reassure the person that
care is being provided.
• Remove rings and other jewelry that may cause problems if
the area around a bite swells.
• Immobilize a bitten arm with a splint and a sling, keeping
the wound lower than the level of the victim’s heart.
Rattlesnake
Wilderness Survival First Aid.


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 59
.Wilderness Survival First Aid
If the victim must wait for medical attention to arrive, have
the victim lie down and remain still. Position the injured area
lower than the victim’s heart, and immobilize the bitten limb
with a splint. For the bite of a coral snake, to slow the spread of
venom, wrap the area with a bandanna or strip of cloth at least
1 inch wide, 2 to 4 inches above the bite (between the heart and
the bite). This is not a tourniquet; it is intended to impede the
lymphatic system but not the circulation of blood.
Make the band comfortably snug but loose enough
to slip a finger under easily. Periodically check for a
pulse on both sides of the band. You must not cut off
blood circulation entirely. Do not use a constriction
band around a finger, a toe, the head, or the trunk.
Treat for shock,
but keep a bitten
extremity lower
than the heart.
Just as important are these don’ts for the treatment of
a snakebite.
• Don’t make any cuts on the bite, apply suction,
apply a tourniquet, or use electric shock (such as
from a car battery). All of these so-called remedies
can cause more harm to the victim and are not
proven to be effective.
• Don’t apply ice to a snakebite. Ice will not help the
injury but may damage the skin and tissue.
• Don’t give the victim alcohol, sedatives, or aspirin.
Doing so could speed up the absorption of venom,
aggravate nausea, or could fuel fear and panic
in the victim.
Remember this ditty
for safety around coral
snakes: red and black—
friendly jack; red and
yellow—deadly fellow.
In this harmless milk snake, the
red and black rings touch
each other.
RED BLACK





.A Final Word
A Final Word
Outdoor adventures are among the highlights of Scouting.
Plan ahead and prepare so that you don’t get into survival
situations. Nearly every time, you and those in your group
will be fine.
Go to the backcountry with the understanding that there
are risks to be managed, and that sometimes emergencies can
arise. When they do, use your skills, the gear you have with
you, and the resources around you. Keep a positive attitude,
and don’t ever give up. Do your best and expect good things
to happen. That is the heart of wilderness survival.


62 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Wilderness Survival Resources.
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Deck of First Aid; Emergency First Aid
pocket guide; Basic Illustrated
Wilderness First Aid; Be Prepared First
Aid Book; Backpacking, Camping,
Canoeing, Emergency Preparedness,
First Aid, Lifesaving, Orienteering,
Safety, Search and Rescue, Signs,
Signals, and Codes, and Weather merit
badge pamphlets
With your parent’s permission,
visit Scouting America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
Books
Curtis, Rick. The Backpacker’s Field
Manual: A Comprehensive Guide to
Mastering Backcountry Skills. Three
Rivers Press, 2005.
Forgey,William W. Wilderness
Medicine: Beyond First Aid, 7th ed.
Falcon Guides, 2017.
Gill, Paul G. Wilderness First Aid.
Ragged Mountain Press, 2001.
Harvey, Mark. National Outdoor
Leadership School’s Wilderness
Guide: The Classic Handbook.
Fireside, 1999.
Isaac, Jeffrey. The Outward Bound
Wilderness First Aid Handbook,
4th ed. Falcon Guides, 2013.
Keller, William. Keller’s Outdoor
Survival Guide: How to Prevail
When Lost, Stranded, or Injured
in the Wilderness. Willow Creek
Press, 2001.
Nickens, T. Edward. The Total
Outdoorsman Manual. Welden
Owen, 2013.
Randall, Glenn. Outward Bound Map
and Compass Handbook, 3rd ed.
FalconGuides, 2012.
Tawrell, Paul. Camping and Survival:
The Ultimate Outdoors Book. Paul
Tawrell, 2011.
Tilton, Buck. Wilderness First
Responder: How to Recognize, Treat,
and Prevent Emergencies in the
Backcountry. Falcon Guides, 2010.
Wells, Darran. Wilderness Navigation,
2nd ed. Stackpole Books, 2013.
Wilderness Survival Resources


WILDERNESS SURVIVAL 63
.Wilderness Survival Resources
Videos
More Wilderness 911. DVD.
Wellspring Media, 1998.
Survival Basics 1 and 2, The Adventure.
DVD. Stoney-Wolf Productions, 2006.
Survival: Learn to Become a
Survivor in the Wild. DVD. BFS
Entertainment, 2001.
The Unexplained—Wilderness Survival.
DVD. A&E Home Video, 2006.
Organizations and Websites
Association of Outdoor Recreation
and Education
Telephone: 810-299-2782
Website: www.aore.org
Backpacker magazine
Website: www.backpacker.com
Equipped to Survive
Website: www.equipped.org
Guide to Safe Scouting on
Scouting.org
Website: www.scouting.org/health-
and-safety/gss/
National Outdoor Leadership
School (NOLS)
Toll-free telephone: 800-710-6657
Website: www.nols.edu
Outside magazine
Website: www.outsideonline.com
Wilderness Education Association
Telephone: 740-607-9759
Website: www.weainfo.org
Wildwood Survival
Website: www.wildwoodsurvival.com
Acknowledgments
Scouting America thanks Patrick “Rick”
LaValla, president and cofounder of ERI
International Inc., Olympia, Washington,
for his assistance with this edition of the
Wilderness Survival merit badge pam-
phlet. ERI International specializes in
disaster planning, emergency response,
search and rescue, survival, and other
such fields.
Thanks also to members of the
Scouting America Health and Safety
Committee for their help in reviewing
the manuscript. In particular, we thank
George Allen, M.D.; David Bell, Ph.D.;
William W. Forgey, M.D.; John E.
Hendrickson; William Hurst; Charles H.
Mitchell; Arthur H. Mittelstaedt Jr.,
Ed.D.; and Paul Young, R.S., M.P.H.
We appreciate support from the
American Red Cross, in particular
Ted Crites for his input and expertise.
Thanks to the troops of the Chief
Seattle (Washington) Council for their
assistance with photography. We thank
staff members at the council’s Camp
Parsons, Brinnon, Washington, for their
cooperation, as well.
We are thankful to Thomas R.
Welch, M.D., professor and chair,
Department of Pediatrics at Upstate
Medical University in Syracuse, New
York, for providing the information
about thumbnail navigation.
Scouting America is grateful to
the men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.


64 WILDERNESS SURVIVAL
Wilderness Survival Resources.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Scott Bauer, USDA Agricultural
Research Service, Bugwood.org,
courtesy—page 47 (both ticks)
James O. Howell, University of Georgia,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—page 47
(brown recluse spider)
James Solomon, USDA Forest Service,
Bugwood.org, courtesy—cover
and page 57 (spider)
©2003 Texas Parks and Wildlife,
courtesy—page 48 (coral snake)
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Dan Bryant—cover and page 38 (water
treatment tablets)
Daniel Giles—pages 23 and 38 (youth)
John McDearmon—all illustrations on
pages 24–27, 29, 33, 36, 37, and 44
Christian Michaels—page 22
Mary Oakes—page 24 (photo)
Brian Payne—pages 6, 28, 35, 36
(photo), and 59
Randy Piland—pages 21 and 43