AMERICAN
BUSINESS


AMERICAN
BUSINESS
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
1. Do the following:
(a) Explain four features of the free enterprise system in the
United States. Describe the difference between freedom and
license. Tell how the Scout Oath and Scout Law apply to
business and free enterprise.
(b) Describe the Industrial Revolution and tell about the major
developments that marked the start of the modern industrial
era in the United States. Discuss three people who had a great
influence on business or industry in the United States and
describe what each did.
(c) Identify and describe to your counselor the five primary
areas of business.
(d) Explain the history of labor unions in the United States
and the importance of labor unions and employers working
together. Identify two major labor unions currently in
existence.
(e) Discuss with your counselor how business impacts the
local, national, and global economy.
2. Do the following:
(a) Explain the three basic types of financial statements
(income statement, balance sheet, and statement of cash
flows). Discuss with your counselor how each statement can
help business leaders make better decisions.
(b) Explain how changes in interest rates, taxes, and
government spending affect the flow of money into or out of
business and industry.
(c) Explain how a sole proprietorship, partnership, or
limited liability company gets its capital. Discuss and explain
four ways a corporation
obtains capital.
35850
ISBN 978-0-8395-3325-2
©2023 Boy Scouts of America
2023 Printing


AMERICAN BUSINESS 3
(d) Name five kinds of insurance useful to business. Describe
their purposes.
3. Do the following:
(a) Explain the place of profit in business.
(b) Describe to your counselor green marketing and
sustainable
business practices.
(c) Explain how ethics plays a role in business decision
making.
(d) Discuss the differences between operating a brick-and-
mortar business versus an online business.
4. Describe the role of the U.S. Department of Labor. Discuss
two of the
following topics with your counselor:
(a) Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA)
(b) Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA)
(c) Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA)
(d) Employee Retirement Income Security Act (ERISA)
5. Choose a business and research how it applies each of the
primary areas of business (accounting, finance, economics,
marketing, and management). Share what you have learned
with your counselor.
6. Do ONE of the following:
(a) Choose one of the primary areas of business and identify
three career opportunities. Select one and research the
education, training, and experience required for this career.
Discuss this with your counselor and explain why this
interests you.
(b) Select a business leader and interview this individual to
learn more about his or her company and career path.
Discuss the role ethics plays in making business decisions.
Share what you have learned with your counselor.


4 AMERICAN BUSINESS
American Business Resources.
American Business Resources
Scouting Literature
American Labor, Citizenship in the
Nation, Citizenship in the World,
Communication, Digital Technology,
Entrepreneurship, Law, Personal
Management, and Salesmanship
merit badge pamphlets
Books
American Bar Association Staff. The
American Bar Association Legal
Guide for Small Business, 2nd
edition. Random House
Reference, 2010.
Bossidy, Larry, and Ram Charan.
Execution: The Discipline of Getting
Things Done, revised edition.
Random House Business
Books, 2011.
Covey, Sean. The 7 Habits of Highly
Effective Teens. Touchstone, 2014.
Culligan, Judy. Tycoons and
Entrepreneurs. MacMillan
Reference Books, 1998.
Hardemann, Susie Vaccaro. Stock
Market Knowledge for All Ages.
Ten Speed Press, 2004.
Lichtenstein, Nelson. State of the Union:
A Century of American Labor, revised
and expanded edition. Princeton
University Press, 2013.
McCormick, Anita Louise. The Industrial
Revolution in American History.
Enslow, 1998.
National Association of Investors
Corporation. Investing in Your
Future, 2nd edition. South-Western
Educational Publishing, 2007.
Norman, Jan. What No One Ever
Tells You About Starting Your Own
Business, 2nd edition. Kaplan
Business, 2004.
Peters, Thomas J., and Robert H.
Waterman Jr. In Search of Excellence:
Lessons From America’s Best-Run
Companies. HarperBusiness, 2004.
Serwer, Andy, ed. American Enterprise:
A History of Business in America.
Smithsonian Books, 2015.
Thiel, Peter, and Blake Masters. Zero
to One: Notes on Startups, or How to
Build the Future. Crown
Business, 2014.
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


AMERICAN BUSINESS 5
.American Business Resources
Organizations and Websites
BetterInvesting
P.O. Box 220
Royal Oak, MI 48068
Toll-free telephone: 877-275-6242
Website: www.betterinvesting.org
Council of Better Business Bureaus
3033 Wilson Blvd., Suite 600
Arlington, VA 22201
Website: www.bbb.org/council/about/
council-of-better-business-bureaus/
Investopedia
Website: www.investopedia.com
Junior Achievement My Way
(Student Resources)
Website: www.jamyway.org
National Endowment for Financial
Education
1331 17th St., Suite 1200
Denver, CO 80202
Telephone: 303-741-6333
Website: www.nefe.org
U.S. Department of Labor
200 Constitution Ave. NW
Washington DC, 20210
Toll-free telephone: 866-487-2365
Website: www.dol.gov