READING
BOY SCOUTS OF AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


Requirements
1. Do EACH of the following:
a. Take a tour of a library. Discuss with your counselor
how the library is organized and what resources and/or
services are offered in the library.
b. Learn how to search a library’s card catalog or
computerized catalog by author, title, and subject.
c. In a library, search the card catalog or computerized
catalog for six books of four different types, such as
poetry, fiction, nonfiction, and biographies.
d. With the assistance of your merit badge counselor or
the librarian, see if you can locate on the shelves the six
books you selected.
e. Explain what is a library card, why it is needed, and
how to get one.
2. Do EACH of the following:
a. Identify a book you have enjoyed. Find out what other
books the author has written.
b. Look at one or more “best books” lists. These can be
based on year, subject, or even all time. Identify at least
one book you would like to read.
35940
ISBN 978-0-8395-0148-0
©2022 Boy Scouts of America
2022 Printing
Always check www.scouting.org for the latest requirements.


READING 3
3. Read four different types of books, such as poetry, fiction,
nonfiction, or biographies. Do any one of the following for
each book you have read:
a. Write a review of the book. Include what you liked/
didn’t like about the book. Include whether you would
recommend this book, and if so, who might enjoy
reading it.
b. Watch a movie based on the book. What was the same
between the book and movie? What was different?
Which did you enjoy more? Discuss this with your merit
badge counselor.
c. Give a “book talk” to your class, troop, or patrol.
4. Read a nonfiction book or magazine that teaches you how
to do something like cooking, wood-building projects, video
game design, science experiments, knot-tying, etc. With
your counselor’s and parent’s permission, complete a project
from the book. Share your experience with your merit badge
counselor. Reading a merit badge pamphlet will not count
toward completing this requirement.
5. Read about the world around you from any two sources:
books, magazines, newspapers, the internet (with your par-
ent’s/guardian’s permission), field manuals, etc. Topics may
include Scouting, sports, environmental problems, politics,
social issues, current events, nature, religion, etc. Discuss
what you have learned with your counselor.
6. With your counselor’s and parent’s or guardian’s permis-
sion, choose ONE of the following activities and devote at
least four hours of service to that activity. Discuss your
participation with your counselor.
a. Read to a sick, blind, or homebound person in a hospital
or in an extended-care facility.
b. Perform volunteer work at your school library or a
public library.
c. Read stories to younger children, in a group
or individually.
d. Organize a book swap in your troop, school, or place
of worship.
e. Organize a book drive to collect books. Donate them to
an organization in need.


4 READING
Reading Resources.
Scouting Literature
Scouts BSA Handbook for Boys; Scouts
BSA Handbook for Girls; Fieldbook;
Stories for Around the Campfire; More
Stories for Around the Campfire
Book Lists
Book lists or reading lists are put
together every year by readers,
librarians, and others who know
books. Your school or public library
will have lists to get you started.
Many lists are published on the web;
the internet address of some are given
here. Also ask your librarian or teacher
for a list of books that have won (or
are competing for) your state’s awards
for children’s and young adult books.
American Library Association:
Best Books for Young Adults
www.ala.org/yalsa/booklists/bbya
Education World: Summer
Reading Lists
www.educationworld.com/summer_
reading
International Literacy Association
Reading Lists
www.literacyworldwide.org/
get-resources/reading-lists
Newbery Medal Winners and
Honor Books
www.ala.org/alsc/awardsgrants/
bookmedia/newberymedal/
newberymedal
TeachersFirst.com: 100 Best Books
www.teachersfirst.com/100books.cfm
Young Adult Books Central
www.yabookscentral.com
Little Free Libraries
How to create a library in your
neighborhood: littlefreelibrary.org/start
and go.scoutlife.org/LFL
LFL Eagle Scout Projects:
littlefreelibrary.org/eagle-scout-library-
build
eagleprojects.scoutlife.org/
6-little-free-libraries-with-books-and-
sitting-area
Reading Resources
With your parent’s permission, visit
the Boy Scouts of America’s official
retail website, www.scoutshop.org,
for a complete listing of all merit
badge pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.


READING 5
.Reading Resources
Books Online
Many classic books are available online
for no charge. Several websites have
free e-books (electronic books) that you
can read on a computer or print out to
read later. The websites listed here offer
hundreds of e-books.
The Online Books Page
Website: digital.library.upenn.edu/books
Project Gutenberg
www.gutenberg.org
Magazines
Readers your age can choose from many
magazines published especially for you.
Some of these magazines also publish
stories and articles written by young
people. Check your school or public
library for these and other magazines.
Scout Life
P.O. Box 152401
Irving, TX 75015-2401
Toll-free telephone: 866-584-6589
www.scoutlife.org
Subscribe to Scout Life through your
Scout unit or use promo code BLMBP12
online for a special half-price discount
Cricket (ages 9 to 14)
1751 Pinnacle Drive, Suite 600
McLean, VA 22102
Telephone: 703-885-3400
shop.cricketmedia.com
Kids Discover
192 Lexington Ave., Suite 1003
New York, NY 10016-6913
Telephone: 212-677-4457
www.kidsdiscover.com
National Geographic Kids
1145 17th St. NW
Washington, DC 20036-4688
Toll-free telephone: 800-647-5463
Website:
http://kids.nationalgeographic.com
Skipping Stones
P.O. Box 3939
Eugene, OR 97403
Telephone: 541-342-4956
www.skippingstones.org
Stone Soup: The Magazine
by Young Writers & Artists
P.O. Box 83
Santa Cruz, CA 95063
Toll-free telephone: 800-447-4569
www.stonesoup.com
Newspapers
Ask your counselor or a librarian to
help you find newspaper articles on
subjects that interest you. Listed here
is a website that contains online
newspaper indexes. Your librarian can
show you how to search for articles
using this or other indexes.
Refdesk.com
www.refdesk.com/paper.html


6 READING
Reading Resources.
Reference Books
Check the reference section of your
school or public library for these and
many other useful reference books.
Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges.
Barron’s Educational Series, annual.
Books in Print. Bowker, annual.
Contemporary Authors. Gale, annual.
Current Biography. H.W. Wilson, annual.
Guinness World Records. Bantam
Books, annual.
Readers’ Guide to Periodical Literature.
H.W. Wilson, annual.
Subject Guide to Books in Print.
Bowker, annual.
Subject Guide to Children’s Books in
Print. Bowker, annual.
Organizations and Websites
Ask your counselor, parent, or librar-
ian to recommend web-related guides,
directories, and search engines that
are good for internet users your age.
Bookshare
www.bookshare.org
Internet Search Engines for Kids
www.ivyjoy.com/rayne/kidssearch.html
Literacy Programs
Hundreds of organizations promote
literacy. Here are a few of the major
programs. Through them you may find
local opportunities.
National Literacy Directory
www.nld.org
American Foundation for the Blind
1401 South Clark St., Suite 730
Arlington, VA 22202
Toll-free telephone: 800-232-5463
www.afb.org
The Barbara Bush Foundation
for Family Literacy
516 N. Adams St.
Tallahassee, FL 32301
Telephone: 850-562-5300
www.barbarabush.org
Read Across America
National Education Association
1201 16th St., NW
Washington, DC 20036-3290
Telephone: 202-833-4000
www.readacrossamerica.org
Reading Is Fundamental Inc.
750 First St., NE, Suite 920
Washington, DC 20002
Toll-free telephone: 877-743-7323
www.rif.org
Bookshare has signed a memorandum of mutual support with the Boy Scouts
of America that emphasizes an ongoing relationship to provide Scouts and their
leaders access to an electronic library of key Scouting publications. Individuals
with disabilities can have resources like the Scouts BSA handbook and dozens
of merit badge pamphlets at their fingertips—on their PCs, smartphones, and
e-readers via audiobooks, or can hear books being read as words are highlighted
on a screen. These resources can even be accessed using a Braille “reader”—a
display that can be hooked up to a computer to generate a Braille translation.
For more information about Bookshare and its agreement with the BSA, go to
http://blog.scoutingmagazine.org/2011/09/28/bookshare-bsa-open-a-new-chapter.