NETSMARTZ
STUDENT
PROJECT KIT
Version 1.5


Download additional copies of the kit at NetSmartz.org/StudentKit.
Please email any questions about the kit to NetSmartz_contact@ncmec.org.
About This Kit ................................... 3
Advisor Start Guide .......................... 4
Student Start Guide ......................... 5
Review the Issues ............................ 6
Tips for Project Delivery .................. 10
Internet Safety Projects
Give a Presentation ......................... 11
Perform a Skit .................................. 12
Classroom Activities by Grade ........ 14
Activities for Everyone ..................... 19
TABLE of
CONTENTS


3Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Why use this kit?
This kit empowers middle and high school students to
educate their peers and younger students about online
safety and digital citizenship. While students prepare to
give a project, they also have the opportunity to review
and relearn important online safety concepts. The kit
puts students in the driver’s seat and allows them to
engage with their peers as the Internet safety “experts.”
Who should use this kit?
This kit is designed for educators and other adult
advisors to use with middle and high school students.
Consider using it:
• In the classroom as part of an online
safety curriculum.
• To help students fulfill school community
service hours.
• As a youth group service project
(e.g., scouting, 4-H, rotary clubs).
What’s in the kit?
• Overview of the main Internet safety and digital
citizenship issues:
» Cyberbullying
» Digital ethics
» Digital literacy
» Inappropriate content
» Online privacy
» Sexting
» Unwanted sexual requests
• Internet safety activities and project ideas students
can use with grades K-12
• Tips to help students lead their projects successfully
About
This Kit
The NetSmartz Student Project Kit was created by
NetSmartz® Workshop, a program of the
National Center for Missing & Exploited Children®.
NetSmartz teaches children ages 5-17 about online safety
and digital citizenship. It offers free, age-appropriate resources
including videos, games, e-books, webcomics, presentations,
classroom lessons, and tip sheets to help children learn how
to protect themselves and their friends online.
Parents, educators, and law enforcement can use these
materials to engage children in discussions about online
issues ranging from privacy to cyberbullying.
“Research shows that
elementary peer
mentoring programs
can increase the use of
critical thinking skills,
interpersonal skills, and
conflict resolution skills.”
- Rekrut, M. D. (1994). Peer and cross-
age tutoring: The lessons of research.
Journal of Reading, 37(5), 356-362.


4Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Advisor
Start Guide
1. Read through the kit.
Before letting students use the kit, you may want to read
through it to familiarize yourself with its content and the
main Internet safety issues. The student section of the
kit starts with the “Student Start Guide.” Depending
on the number of students participating, you may want
each student to have an individual copy or have students
divide into project teams and share a copy.
2. Review the issues with students.
The better students understand the issues, the more
confident and effective they will be when talking
about them. The “Review the Issues” section gives a
brief overview of the main Internet safety and digital
citizenship issues. It also includes discussion prompts
you can use with students or have them use with each
other to encourage critical thinking about the issues.
To give your students a more comprehensive look at the
issues, consider delivering a NetSmartz Internet Safety
Presentation. There are age-appropriate presentations
for both tweens and teens that include news stories and
activities to enhance students’ understanding of the issues.
Download the NetSmartz Internet Safety Presentations
at NetSmartz.org/Presentations
Tip:
Educators and other adults can learn
more about the issues with the free
Online Educator Training Program at
NetSmartz.org/Training.
3. Choose an Internet safety project.
The projects in this kit can help middle and high school
students talk to younger students and their peers about
online safety issues. Students can:
• Give a presentation.
• Perform a skit.
• Lead a classroom activity.
Review the project students choose to ensure it is issue-
and age-appropriate for them and for their audience.
For example, a project that addresses sexting may be
appropriate for high school students but not elementary
school students. If necessary, help students modify
projects to fit their maturity level and that of their
chosen audience.
In addition to picking the best project for their audience,
students should also choose a project they can
successfully implement. Help students consider their
interests, abilities, access to materials, and number of
available participants when choosing a project.
4. Help students find a project site.
You will need to set a time, date, and location for
students to implement their project. Possible project
sites include schools, community centers, religious
centers, afterschool programs, and extracurricular youth
groups (e.g., Girl Scouts).
Although students can deliver their projects at any time,
sites may be more interested in having them come when
there’s a greater focus on Internet safety or student
leadership. Ask about students delivering their projects
during times such as:
• Safer Internet Day (February)
• National Volunteer Week (April)
• National Student Leadership Week (April)
• Internet Safety Month (June)
• Cybersecurity Month (October)
5. Help students prepare.
• Students may need help with logistics, such as
getting project supplies, practicing their delivery, and
traveling to the project site. There may also be other
considerations, such as permission forms for school-
based groups.
• Encourage students to practice their project
until they are comfortable with it. Consider
gathering a group of their peers or other adults
for a practice session.
• Ask students to think about what questions their
audience may ask and brainstorm answers in
advance. Some audience members may have
experienced cyberbullying or another type of abuse.
Be prepared to step in if they share about these
incidents during the student-led activities.
• Students may want to integrate additional Internet
safety resources into their projects. They can
download free materials, such as tip sheets,
lesson plans, and videos from NetSmartz.org.
6. Give us your feedback!
Please help us continue to make the kit a useful tool
for you and your students. After you have completed
a project, share your thoughts and encourage your
students to do the same.
Advisor Survey:
http://sgiz.mobi/s3/SPK-Educator-Feedback
Student Survey:
http://sgiz.mobi/s3/SPK-Student-Feedback


5Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Student
Start Guide
Help create a safer, kinder online environment for your
friends, classmates, younger siblings, and community
with the NetSmartz Student Project Kit! The kit can help
you and others in your online community become more
responsible digital citizens. A good digital citizen:
• Respects others.
• Speaks up.
• Protects themselves and their information.
The kit has projects you can use to educate younger
students and your peers about Internet safety. Get
started with the steps below.
1. Review the issues.
The more you understand about the issues, the more
comfortable and confident you will be while leading your
project. Read through the “Review the Issues” section
and use the discussion prompts to start a conversation
about the issues.
2. Choose a project.
The projects in this kit are designed to help you talk
to students in grades K-12 about online safety issues
like cyberbullying, online privacy, and unwanted sexual
requests. You can:
• Give a presentation.
• Perform a skit.
• Lead a classroom activity.
While choosing a project, think about:
• Your audience’s grade/age. You will need to choose
a project that is age-appropriate. Try to choose a
project about an Internet safety issue students in
that age group usually face.
• The materials you need to complete the project.
Some of the projects require supplies like crayons,
paper, and scissors. Others can only be done with a
specific number of participants.
• The time it will take to deliver. Pick a project
you can complete within the time you have with
your audience.
• Using additional resources. Take your project to
the next level with the tip sheets, videos, and other
materials on NetSmartz.org.
3. Deliver your project!
4. Share your feedback.
What do you think of the kit? Tell us at
http://sgiz.mobi/s3/SPK-Student-Feedback.


6Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
If you are being
cyberbullied
• Don’t respond.
• Block the bullies.
• Save any evidence.
• Report to the website.
• Remember you are not
alone! Talk to friends and
an adult you trust.
If you’re a bystander
• Don’t share or like
cyberbullying comments
or images.
• Support the victim. For
example, send or post a
kind message.
• Report cyberbullying.
Cyberbullying
Cyberbullying is the use of Internet and mobile technologies to harass others. It includes spreading mean rumors,
posting embarrassing images, impersonating others, and sending threatening messages.
Cyberbullying usually involves a victim, one or more bullies, and one or more bystanders. Victims of cyberbullying may
react in a number of ways. Some kids and teens shrug it off; others are more severely affected. They may have low
self-esteem, get bad grades, avoid going online or going to school, and change schools.
Review
The Issues
If you’re thinking
about cyberbullying
• Stop! Think about how
being cyberbullied would
make you feel.
• Calm down. Try talking to
a friend or trusted adult.
• Consider the
consequences. You could
get in trouble at school or
with the law.
Before choosing a project, brush up on your
knowledge of the main Internet safety and digital
citizenship issues. Use the discussion prompts to
talk about how these issues are affecting your
school or community.
Discussion Prompts
• Do you think cyberbullying is a problem in your school/community? Why or why not?
• How do you think people who are cyberbullied feel?
• Have you ever witnessed anyone being cyberbullied? What did you do?
• Have you ever made a report about cyberbullying? What happened next? Did you feel like the problem was solved?
• Brainstorm some ways your school/community can fight cyberbullying.


7Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Digital Ethics
Digital ethics is about following the online rules – even if
no one is there to catch you breaking them. One of the
most important online rules is respecting content posted
by other people. This includes not pirating (stealing)
copyrighted content like movies and music. It also
includes giving credit to the creators of any text, images,
or music that you use.
If you quote an online article in a paper, you should credit
the author. Failure to do so is called plagiarism – which
is a type of cheating. The Internet has made it easier
to plagiarize and cheat in other ways, such as posting
homework solutions online and texting each other test
answers. Sometimes the line between cheating and
using the Internet for “help” may seem blurry, so it is
important to talk to teachers about their expectations for
each assignment.
Discussion Prompts
• How are artists hurt when people steal music and
movies online?
• How would you feel if someone pirated something
you created?
• What would you do if a friend offered you a pirated
copy of a movie?
• How would you feel if you knew one of your
classmates was using the Internet to cheat?
• Is it OK to work with your friends online to complete
a homework assignment?
Digital Literacy
There is a lot of information on the Internet, but not all of
it is true. Digital literacy skills – the ability to understand
what you read and see online – help people find online
sources with trustworthy and accurate information. They
also help people think critically about what they see online
and encourage them not to take anything at face value.
Learning these skills allows Internet users to navigate
the Web with confidence. For example, you should know
how to tell legitimate (real) online offers from fake ones,
how to fact-check the information you find online, and
how to tell if a website is trustworthy (Hint: websites with
URLs that end in .edu or .gov are usually reliable).
Discussion Prompts
• How can you tell if something you’ve read online
is true?
• Have you ever read something online you thought
was true, only to find out later it wasn’t?
• What would make you suspicious of a website?
• Name three clues that can help you tell if a website
is trustworthy.
• Have you ever filled out an online offer form
promising a free item? What happened next?
REVIEW THE ISSUES


8Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Inappropriate Content
You can find almost anything online – from videos about
kittens to mature content with violent, hateful, or sexual
themes. A lot of this mature content is inappropriate
for those under 18. It can be especially disturbing for
younger children, but even older teens may be bothered
if they come across this content unintentionally. It is
important to remember that it is not your fault if you
accidentally come across inappropriate content online.
Try to avoid inappropriate content by double checking
the URLs you type and being careful about clicking on
unknown links.
In addition to encountering inappropriate content online,
kids and teens may also share and post inappropriate
comments and images. While it is best to refrain from
illegal or inappropriate actions in the first place, some
people have gotten into more trouble by sharing comments
or images about them online. If someone shares or asks
you to share inappropriate content, consider blocking
that person and reporting them to the website.
Think before posting:
• Drinking and drug use
• Hate speech
• Lewd or offensive gestures
• Profanity
• Revealing or suggestive images
• Threats
Discussion Prompts
• Have you ever come across any content online that
bothered you?
• Who would you talk to if you came across content
online that bothered you?
• Would anyone be embarrassed or hurt by the
information you share online?
• Have you ever seen any posts from friends that
changed the way you thought about them?
• What do you think the information you’ve shared
online says about you?
Online Privacy
Many people share information about themselves online
through comments, images, and text messages. But
once you put information online, it’s easy to lose control
of it. Anyone with access to your social media accounts
may copy, share, and alter the information. That’s
why it’s important to take precautions to keep your
information safe online. Create strong passwords (and
don’t share them!), consider friend requests carefully,
and only accept people you know you can trust.
Those who reveal too much personal information online
have become targets for identity theft, scams, computer
hacks, and other trouble. Before sharing personal
information it is important to check websites for signs
that they are trustworthy. For example, before entering
financial information like a credit card number on a
website, check the URL for “https” or the lock symbol.
Think before sharing:
• Addresses
• Financial information
• Passwords
• Phone numbers
• Schedules
• Social security numbers
Discussion Prompts
• What do you do to keep your online information
private and secure?
• How do you decide who to add to your friends’ list?
• When do you think it’s OK to share personal
information online?
• How frequently do you change your passwords?
• Have you ever had anyone steal a password? What
happened next?
Tip:
Learn more about the
issues and get tips
for handling them at
NetSmartz.org/Tipsheets.
REVIEW THE ISSUES


9Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Unwanted Sexual Requests
While online, kids and teens may receive unwanted
requests from adults asking them for nude images, to
have a sexual conversation, or to meet offline for sex.1
These requests may come from people they’ve met
online or know in real life. They may also come from their
peers or young adults.
Most kids and teens are smart about dealing with sexual
requests. They remove themselves from the situation,
ask the people to stop, or change their personal
information.2 But receiving these requests can still be
distressing. You should never respond to any requests
you receive. Instead, report them to the website and an
adult you trust immediately.
In some cases, adults may target kids and teens for
months before making a request. These adults are
often called “online predators.” They use a process
called “grooming” to gain their victims’ trust and form a
relationship with them.
Adults should not pursue any kid or teen romantically. If
an adult acts interested in a romantic relationship with
you or your peers, it’s a red flag signaling they can’t be
trusted. You should not engage them, refuse to talk to
them about sex or meet them offline, and tell an adult
you trust.
Someone trying to groom kids and teens may:
• Flatter them
• Talk to them about sex
• Send them gifts, such as cell phones or bus tickets
• Ask them to keep secrets
• Try to isolate them from family and friends
• Share or ask them to share revealing images
Discussion Prompts
• Do you know anyone who has received an unwanted
sexual request? How did they respond?
• Why do you think teens are tempted to meet offline?
• Who would you tell if you received an unwanted
sexual request?
• What advice would you give a peer who received an
unwanted sexual request?
• Would you be bothered by an unwanted sexual
request? Why or why not?
Sexting
Sexting is when minors (those under 18) share sexual
images of themselves or other minors online and by
cellphone. Most minors share these images to flirt or
because they were asked to by a boyfriend or girlfriend.
However, sometimes they are pressured into sharing
these images even when they don’t want to. No one
should pressure anyone else into sexting. No one has the
right to make someone else share sexual images – not
even a significant other.
It’s illegal to share sexually explicit images of minors.
However, many minors caught sexting are not charged
with a crime. They may be ordered to attend educational
programs or perform community service. They may
also get in trouble at school and experience social
consequences, such as being judged or excluded by their
peers and communities.
Discussion Prompts
• Do you think kids and teens feel pressured to sext?
Why or why not?
• What would you tell a friend who was thinking
about sexting?
• What advice would you give a friend who received
a sext?
• Do you think people should get in trouble for
forwarding sexts? Why or why not?
• Do you think sexting can be harmful for minors?
Why or why not?
Once you hit send, you
can’t control where
the image goes!
Before sending one, think:
• How would I feel if this image got out?
• Can I really trust that the person I am
sending it to will keep it private?
• How could sending it affect my
relationships with friends, classmates,
parents, teachers, etc.?
Before forwarding one, think:
• How would I feel if someone shared a
photo of me?
• What consequences could I face for
forwarding this?
Tip:
Report unwanted sexual requests to
CyberTipline.org.
1 Mitchell et al. (2014). Trends in unwanted online experiences and sexting:
Final report. Crimes against Children Research Center, University of New
Hampshire: Durham, NH.
2 Ibid.
REVIEW THE ISSUES


10Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Practice.
Gather a group of friends to test your project on. When it’s
over, get their help reviewing your performance. You may
want to ask them questions like, “Were my instructions clear?
Could everyone hear me? Could I have done anything else to
help you?” Time your project so you know how long it takes
to deliver.
Know your audience.
Take some time to think about how they may respond to your
project. For example, if you’re making posters with younger
children, they may need help cutting, coloring, or gluing.
Be ready to answer questions.
You may even want to brainstorm possible questions and their
answers in advance. You do not have to answer any questions
that make you feel uncomfortable. You should direct them to
your advisor instead.
Plan.
Create a day-of checklist that includes the day, time, location,
and materials needed for your project.
Make eye contact.
Making eye contact helps you look more confident and reassures
your audience that you know what you’re talking about.
Project your voice.
You want everyone in the room to be able to hear you. It’s
also important to speak slowly and clearly so everyone can
understand you.
TIPSfor Project
Delivery
These tips can help you prepare to
deliver your project.


Tip:
Use the NetSmartz tip sheets to
get more information about how
to respond to the issues at
NetSmartz.org/Tipsheets.
11Copyright © 2015-2016 National Center for Missing & Exploited Children. All rights reserved.
Give A Presentation
Presentations are a good way to give an overview of the
main online safety issues and some tips about how to
handle them. You can use this outline to create your own.
Make sure to thoroughly research each issue you want to
discuss. Look for statistics, news stories, and video clips
to help get your point across.
Think about which messages are most important for the
students in your audience. What issues do 7th graders
face online? Are they the same issues that 10th graders
face? Ask your advisor for help ensuring that your
presentation is appropriate for your audience.
You may want to consider using a NetSmartz
presentation, especially if you plan to present to students
in grades K-5. These presentations cover the main
Internet safety and digital citizenship issues and include
a guide with speaker’s notes. You can download them at
NetSmartz.org/Presentations.
I. Start your presentation by stating:
a. Your name and grade.
b. Why you are giving the presentation. (e.g., “I am
giving this presentation because I want to be part
of creating a safer online environment.”)
c. Why Internet safety and digital citizenship is
important for everyone. (e.g., “Kids and teens
are online all the time. We should know how to
behave responsibly.”)
d. What Internet safety issue(s) you are going to
talk about.
II. When you talk about the issue(s), you should:
a. Define it. (e.g., “Cyberbullying is using the Internet
to be mean.”)
b. Give an example of what it looks like. Consider
sharing a news story or showing a video. (e.g.,
“Someone posted an embarrassing photo of a teen
and invited people to leave cruel comments.”)
c. Give tips about how to respond to the issue.
(e.g., “If you are cyberbullied, don’t respond.
Save the evidence and make a report.”)
III. End your presentation by:
a. Encouraging your audience to be responsible
digital citizens.
b. Inviting your audience to ask questions.
c. Thanking your audience for their time.
PROJECT
#1


12Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Perform A Skit
A skit can be a fun and easy way to show your audience
positive ways of dealing with difficult online situations.
Choose a skit prompt or brainstorm your own scenario to
start writing your script. Your script should clearly define
the Internet safety issue and explain how children and
teens can respond. Make sure your skit has:
An introduction where you establish the characters
(who) and the setting (where).
Rising action where you explain the problem.
(e.g., Characters are asked for personal information.
They share it and start getting spam.)
Peak action where you show how the characters solve
the problem. (e.g., They report to the website.)
A conclusion where you wrap up any loose ends and
restate the lesson your characters learned. (e.g., You
should be careful about sharing personal information.)
PROJECT
#2
Tip:
Make your skit more realistic by researching
real-life examples of the skit scenarios.


13Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Skit Prompts
Cyberbullying
• Actor 1 is getting mean text messages. He/She asks
a friend (or friends) for advice about what to do.
• Actor 1 is mad at one of his/her classmates.
He/She wants to start a webpage where their
classmates can leave mean comments about the
person. A friend (or friends) talks to Actor 1 about
why this is a bad idea.
• Actors 1 and 2 are taking part in an online gaming
quest with a group of other players. One player
wants everyone to gang up on another player and
keep him/her from participating in the quest. Actors
1 and 2 discuss what to do.
Digital Ethics
• Actor 1 is taking a test when he/she gets a text from
Actor 2. Actor 2 is taking the same test next period.
Actor 2 wants Actor 1 to text him/her a picture
of the test so he/she can look up the answers
in advance.
• Actors 1 and 2 are eating lunch together. Actor 1
tells Actor 2 that someone in their class has started
a website where students can trade homework
answers. They discuss whether to use it or not.
• Actor 1 invites some friends to come over and watch
a movie. When they arrive, they learn Actor 1 plans
to download the movie illegally. The friends talk to
Actor 1 about why he/she shouldn’t do this.
Digital Literacy
• Actors 1 and 2 are working on a school project
together. Actor 1 has found some information
online that seems strange. Actor 2 asks a series
of questions about the website Actor 1 used to get
the information (e.g., “When was the website last
updated?”). They realize the website is not reliable
and discuss the traits of trustworthy websites.
• Actor 1 gets an email offer for a free
tablet computer. All he/she has
to do is share some personal
information. Actor 1 is
excited and wants to share
the information, but Actor 2
explains why this is risky.
Inappropriate Content
• A few friends (2-3 actors) think their math teacher
is so unfair! First, they discuss posting the teacher’s
photo online and making funny comments under it.
Then they talk about why this could be a bad idea.
• Actors 1 and 2 are hanging out after school. Actor 1
checks his/her email on a smartphone and sees an
email from an unknown person with a link to a new
gaming website. Actor 1 wants to open the link, but
Actor 2 gives reasons why he/she shouldn’t.
Online Privacy
• Actor 1 gets a friend request from someone
that says he/she is a classmate. Actor 1 doesn’t
know the person in real life, but is thinking about
accepting the request. Actor 2 shares why he/she
believes accepting the friend request could be a
bad idea.
• Actor 1 is having a birthday party. He/She wants
to post the invitation details on a social media
site (e.g., Instagram, Twitter, Facebook). Actor 2
thinks this is a bad idea. The two imagine what
could happen if they share this type of personal
information online.
Unwanted Sexual Requests
• Actor 1 tells Actor 2 about someone he/she has
met online. The online friend is kind, sends gifts,
and always wants to talk online with Actor 1.
Actor 2 talks to Actor 1 about why he/she may
want to be careful.
• Actor 1 is thinking about meeting someone he/she
met online face-to-face. Actor 2 warns him/her that
this is not a good idea.
• Actors 1 and 2 are playing an online game when
someone asks them to share a sexy image. The two
friends discuss what to do about the request (e.g.,
block the player, report, tell an adult).
Sexting
• Actor 1’s significant other asks him/her to text a
sexy picture. Actor 1 isn’t sure what to do. He/She
asks friends for advice. They tell him/her why it’s
risky to send these types of images. (e.g., Once you
send an image, you lose control of it.)
• Actor 1 receives a text of a sexy picture. Actor 2
asks him/her to forward it. Actor 1 explains why he/
she doesn’t think that’s fair.
PERFORM A SKIT


14Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Lead A Classroom Activity
These classroom activities will help you teach specific,
age-appropriate Internet safety concepts.
PROJECT
#3


15Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Activities for Grades K – 2
Cyberbullying: Use Good Netiquette
This activity will help students understand how rude
behavior can spread online.
You will need:
• “Bad Netiquette Stinks” video. Download it at
NetSmartz.org/NetSmartzKids/BadNetiquetteStinks
• Computer hooked up to an LCD projector
• Goggles/glasses
• Marker
• Stirrers
• Two, 8-ounce cups
• Tray or plate
• Green food dye (optional)
• Vinegar, 2-ounces
• Water, 2-ounces
• Baking soda, ½ teaspoon
• Powdered laundry detergent, ½ teaspoon
What to do:
1. Have students watch the “Bad Netiquette Stinks”
video. Then say, “We’re going to do an experiment
showing how easily bad netiquette can spread online.”
2. Take the cups. Label one cup “Internet” and one cup
“Bad Netiquette.”
3. Have a student mix the laundry detergent and the
vinegar in the “Internet” cup.
4. Have a student mix the water and baking soda in the
“Bad Netiquette” cup.
5. Take the cups from the students. Place the
“Internet” cup on the tray. Hold up the “Bad
Netiquette” cup. Say, “When people use bad
netiquette and are mean to each other online, it
starts spreading just like this...”
6. Pour the “Bad Netiquette” mixture into the “Internet”
cup. The mixture will immediately foam over the cup.
7. Say, “See how easily bad netiquette can spread
online? But we can stop it by being kind and using
good netiquette. Who can give me some examples?”
Write their answers on the board.
Inappropriate Content: It’s OK to Tell
This activity will help younger students understand it’s not
their fault if they come across inappropriate content online.
You will need:
• “It’s OK to Tell” video and discussion guide.
Download them at NetSmartz.org/NetSmartzKids/
ItsOkToTell
• Computer hooked up to an LCD projector
What to do:
1. Show students the video “It’s OK to Tell.”
2. Use the discussion guide to start a conversation with
the students. You may want to reword some of the
questions and/or add your own questions.
Trusted Adults: Thanks for Helping Me
This activity will help students learn about trusted adults.
You will need:
• A “Thank You Card” handout for each student.
Find and download it at NetSmartzKids.org/
ClubUYNActivities
• Crayons and/or markers
What to do:
1. Tell students, “Everyone needs help sometimes.
What adults do you ask for help when you need it?”
Let students respond. Then ask, “Why do you ask
these adults for help?” Write their answers on a
board, pointing out the qualities that make an adult
a trusted adult (e.g., makes them feel safer, listens
to them, helps them).
2. Have students fill out the “Trusted Adult Contact List.”
3. Tell students, “You should tell your trusted adult if
anything or anyone online makes you feel sad, scared,
or confused. To thank them, let’s make a card.”
4. Pass out the thank you card template and crayons/
markers. Direct students to make a card for one of
the trusted adults on their list.
LEAD A CLASSROOM ACTIVITY


16Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Cyberbullying: Words Matter
This activity will help students understand the impact of
mean words said online.
You will need:
• Blackboard/whiteboard
• Paper doll pattern
(You should be able to find a free one online.)
• Paper
• Scissors
What to do:
1. Have each student make a paper doll. Then ask
them to crumple it up and then try to straighten
it back out.
2. Ask students, “Was anyone able to get all of the
wrinkles out of their doll?”(Hint: No one will be
able to.)
3. Tell students, “Mean comments online are like the
wrinkles in our dolls. You can delete them, but you
can’t get rid of them completely.”
4. Ask students to brainstorm ways to be kind to each
other online. Write their answers on the board.
Digital Literacy: Webster’s Gecko Goof
This activity will help students understand that not
everything they read online is true.
You will need:
• Webster’s Gecko Goof e-book and discussion guide.
Download them at NetSmartzKids.org/eBooks/
WebstersGeckoGoof
What to do:
1. Read the story aloud. Try using different voices to
make your story more exciting.
2. Use the discussion guide to start a conversation
with the students. You may want to reword some
of the questions for students in younger grades.
You may also want to add your own questions.
Online Privacy: Shh! It’s Personal
This activity will help students learn about the
importance of keeping personal information private.
You will need:
• Blank white notecards
• Pens/Pencils
What to do:
1. Ask students, “Do you know what personal
information is?” (e.g., first and last names, home
address, school name, phone number). Write their
answers on the board.
2. Pass out the notecards. Ask students to write
three pieces of personal information on each card,
excluding their names. Ask them to try to think of
personal information that is unique to them. Write
your own card with personal information that will
allow the class to easily guess your identity.
3. Collect the cards, shuffle them, and pass them out
again, including your card. Have a few students read
the information on their cards aloud. Make sure your
card is read. Ask the class if they can guess who
wrote the cards based on the information shared.
4. Say, “As we just saw, personal information can
tell people a lot about you. When you’re online,
if a website or person asks you for personal
information they can learn a lot about you, too,
so you have to be careful about what you share.
Make sure to ask a trusted adult before sharing
any personal information.”
Activities for Grades 3 - 5
LEAD A CLASSROOM ACTIVITY


17Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Cyberbullying: Don’t Stand By
This activity will encourage students to think about
standing up for peers being cyberbullied.
You will need:
• Stand By or Stand Up? webcomic and
discussion guide. Download the guide at
NSTeens.org/Comics/StandByOrStandUp
• Computer lab
What to do:
1. Put students in pairs. Direct them to the NSTeens
webcomic Stand By or Stand Up? Encourage
students to play through the comic at least twice,
making different decisions the second time. Give
them 10-15 minutes.
2. Use the discussion guide to start a conversation with
the students. You may want to reword some of the
questions and/or add your own questions.
3. Ask students to share some ways of standing up for
people who are being cyberbullied.
Digital Ethics: Choices and Cheaters
You will need:
• Choices and Cheaters webcomic and discussion
guide. Download the guide at NSTeens.org/Comics/
ChoicesAndCheaters
• Computer hooked up to an LCD projector OR
computer lab
• Paper and writing utensils
What to do:
1. Prep students by asking a few questions. Ask:
a. What are some reasons people cheat in school?
b. Has technology made cheating easier to do,
and/or easier to catch? Why?
2. Depending on computer access, put students
into groups, or have them work individually
and direct them to NSTeens.org/Comics/
ChoicesAndCheaters. If there is only one
available computer, hook it to a projector, and
pull up the website.
3. Have students scroll and play through the interactive
comic strip at least 2 times. Have them make
different choices on the second round to see how
it ends up.
4. As a follow up, tell students that they will write
another scene to fit into the existing comic that
poses an additional opportunity for CL to cheat or be
a good digital citizen (e.g., A friend invites CL to join
an online group where classmates share homework
assignments. Does she join or reject the request?).
5. Pass out paper and writing utensils. You may
choose to have students complete this activity as
individuals, in pairs or small groups.
6. If time permits, have students share with the class
the new scene that they’ve written.
Meeting Offline: Friend or Fake?
This activity will help students think twice about the
people they meet online.
You will need:
• “Friend or Fake?” video and discussion guide.
Download them at NSTeens.org/Videos/
FriendOrFake
• Computer hooked up to an LCD projector
What to do:
1. Show students the video “Friend or Fake?”
2. Use the discussion guide to start a conversation with
the students. You may want to reword some of the
questions and/or add your own questions.
Activities for Grades 6 – 8
LEAD A CLASSROOM ACTIVITY


18Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Cyberbullying: Dear Friend...
This activity will help students think about cyberbullying
from the perspective of the bully and the victim.
You will need:
• A news article about cyberbullying (Do not choose
any stories that involve people from your community.)
• Paper
• Pens/Pencils
What to do:
1. Divide students into groups of two or four and have
them read the cyberbullying news story.
2. Ask half of the groups to compose a letter to the
cyberbully. The letters should 1) address why the
cyberbullying may have started; 2) give advice for
handling the situation’s consequences; and 3)
suggest tactics for not bullying in the future.
3. Ask the other groups to compose a letter to the
cyberbullying victim. The letters should 1) address
how the victim feels; 2) suggest ways of responding
to cyberbullying; and 3) offer the victim words of
encouragement.
4. Choose a few groups to share their letters aloud with
the class. Thank them for sharing.
Inappropriate Content: Two Kinds of Stupid
This activity will help students think about the
consequences of taking inappropriate actions and
sharing them online.
You will need:
• “Two Kinds of Stupid” video and discussion
guide. Download them at NSTeens.org/Videos/
TwoKindsOfStupid
• Computer hooked up to an LCD projector
What to do:
1. Ask students to go online and find news stories
where people got in trouble for images and/or
comments they posted online. Have students share
their stories with the group. They should not choose
stories involving people from their community.
2. Show students the video “Two Kinds of Stupid.”
3. Use the discussion guide to start a conversation with
the students. You may want to reword some of the
questions and/or add your own questions.
Sexting: What Happens Next?
This activity will help students understand how hard it is
to keep control over the content they share online.
You will need:
• Notebook paper
• Pens/Pencils
What to do:
1. Before starting your activity, write one of the following
sentences at the top of each piece of paper:
» Her boyfriend asked for a sexy photo.
She decided to send him one.
» A sexy photo of that girl from science class
was going around the school.
» “My sexy photo was just for you,” she said.
“Why did you share it?”
» All of the guys on his team dared each other
to send a nude photo.
2. Write “What Happens Next?” on the board so the
entire class can see. Write these questions under it:
» Who saw the image?
» How did they react?
» How did the person who was in the photo feel
when it was shared?
» What were the consequences for the person
who took the photo?
» What were the consequences for the people
who shared the photo?
3. Divide students into groups of three or four. Tell
them, “We’re going to play a game called ‘What
Happens Next?’ I will give each group the first
sentence in a story. Each person in your group will
take a turn writing the next sentence of the story
until I call time. Do not talk to each other about or
work together on the sentences that you are writing.
You can use the questions on the board for ideas
about what to write.”
4. Pass out the sheets of paper. Give the groups about
10 minutes to complete their stories.
5. After they’re done, say, “In this activity, you couldn’t
control what happened after you wrote your line of
the story. It didn’t matter if you agreed or disagreed
with what the next person wrote. Once you passed
the story on, it was out of your hands. That’s also
what happens when you share something online.
You may not be able to control what happens next.
What do you think could happen if you shared
something online you wanted to stay private?”
6. After students discuss the question, ask a few of the
groups to share their stories. Thank them for sharing.
Activities for Grades 9 - 12
LEAD A CLASSROOM ACTIVITY


19Copyright © 2015-2016 National CenterforMissing&ExploitedChildren.Allrightsreserved.
Activities for Everyone!
These projects are not issue or age-specific. You can do
them with students in any grade level on any Internet
safety or digital citizenship issue you choose.
Hold a contest.
Students can create posters, PSAs, poems, short stories,
or skits around an Internet safety issue.
Have a pledge drive.
Challenge everyone in a grade or school to commit to
being better digital citizens by signing a pledge. You
can use the NetSmartz pledges at NetSmartz.org/
Resources/Pledges or create your own.
Start a discussion.
Choose a news story on an Internet safety issue to share
and discuss. You may want to ask questions like, “Why
do you think this happened? How would you feel if this
happened to you? How would you try to help the person
in the story? What advice would you give them?”
Share daily tips.
Ask your school if you can share Internet safety tips
over the PA system or (if your school has an intra-video
system) show NetSmartz videos throughout the day.
Plan an Internet Safety Week!
You can use any of the above activities to hold an
Internet safety and digital citizenship week. Ask your
school about having your week when there’s a national
focus on student leadership or Internet safety, such as:
• Safer Internet Day (February)
• National Volunteer Week (April)
• National Student Leadership Week (April)
• Internet Safety Month (June)
• Cybersecurity Month (October)
PROJECT
#4


Copyright © 2015-2016 National Center for
Missing & Exploited Children. All rights reserved.
Animated Characters Excluding Tera and Tad
Copyright © 2000-2015 National Center for
Missing & Exploited Children and Boys & Girls
Clubs of America. All rights reserved.