R ADIO
STEM-Based


R ADIO
SCOUTING AMERICA
MERIT BADGE SERIES
“Enhancing our youths’ competitive edge through merit badges”


35938
ISBN 978-0-8395-3361-0
©2025 Scouting America
2025 Printing
Requirements
Scouts should go to www.scouting.org/merit-badges/Radio or check Scoutbook for
the latest requirements.
FPO





4 RADIO


RADIO 5


6 RADIO


RADIO 7
Contents
Adventure on the Airwaves . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
What Is Radio? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Block Diagrams, Schematics, Modulation, and Cellphones . . 29
Safety Precautions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 37
Amateur Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 41
Broadcast Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
Shortwave and Medium Wave Listening . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 73
Amateur Radio Direction Finding . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 81
Careers in Radio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 87
Radio Resources . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 91


8 RADIO
Adventure on the Airwaves.
Adventure on
the Airwaves
Picture yourself as an astronaut on the International Space
Station, talking by radio to Mission Control. Or as a radio news
reporter or a police officer racing to a crime scene. Or as a
storm chaser monitoring weather-spotter reports on ham radio.
All these images share one thing: your interest in radio, either
as part of work or as a hobby.
The World of Radio
With a ham radio license, you might talk to country music
singer Patty Loveless (KD4WUJ), or to a licensed astronaut
aboard the International Space Station. You might talk to an
Israeli Scout during Scouting’s Jamboree-on-the-Air. As a short-
wave listener, you can eavesdrop on Coast Guard helicopters
shadowing a drug runner in the Caribbean. You can listen to
Voice of America, the international radio network of the United
States, and compare it to Radio Beijing’s version. You can get
the exact time from the National Institute of Standards and
Technology’s radio station WWV, or find out the weather in
France by listening in on airliners flying 40,000 feet over Europe.
People use radio signals to control everyday items from
model cars and airplanes to automatic garage door openers
and the door locks on their cars. The U.S. Border Patrol and
the Army use radio signals to control unmanned aerial vehicles
(UAVs), which broadcast television pictures back to the ground.
Pilots and sailors count on radio signals from satellites for the
Global Positioning System (GPS) to help them navigate safely
through the air and oceans.
When you have earned this merit badge, you will know a
lot about radio. Along the way you may even discover a lifelong
hobby or a career. Let’s get started.
You use radio in
some way every
day. You might
listen to satellite
news from
another country,
ride in a bus
equipped with a
business-band
radio and GPS
mapping, watch
educational TV at
school, or see
a police officer
with a walkie-
talkie at the scene
of an accident.


RADIO 9
.Adventure on the Airwaves
Your Choice From Four Options
To complete the Radio merit badge requirements, you
will choose one of these four options to learn more
about: amateur or ham radio, radio broadcasting,
shortwave and medium-wave listening, and amateur
radio direction finding—also known as “foxhunting.”
This pamphlet gives details about each.





RADIO 11
.What Is Radio?
What Is Radio?
Radio is the use of electrical waves to send and receive
information—“communications”—from the transmitter to the
receiver, without wires connecting the two places. The places
might be far apart (a TV transmitter on a satellite orbiting
Earth, and a receiver in your living room) or quite close (a
key fob on your key ring and the remote door-lock receiver
in your car).
Broadcasting uses radio to send information to lots of
people at the same time. The information might be just
voices and music (as in AM or FM or shortwave broadcast-
ing), or it might also include pictures transmitted along with
the sound (television).
Hobby radio is the use of radio by ordinary people—ham
radio operators “working DX” or citizens band operators with
radios in their 18-wheelers, model aircraft or boat enthusiasts
who control their craft by radio remote control, even your Scout
troop using Family Radio Service (FRS) portable radios to keep
in touch while hiking.
Cellular telephones also use radio to transmit text
messages, voice messages, images, locations, and more. They
use a network of cellular towers to extend telephone services
and internet access to nearly everywhere—all using radio.
Broadcasting is one-way radio—a
transmitter sends transmissions to many
receivers, but the receivers can’t reply.
With two-way radio, however, there is a
transmitter and receiver at both ends so
that messages can travel both ways.


12 RADIO
What Is Radio?.
Licenses
In the United States, Puerto Rico, and U.S. territories, radio
transmitters are regulated by an agency of the federal govern-
ment called the Federal Communications Commission, or FCC.
Other countries have agencies that serve the same purpose.
These agencies issue permission for the use of radio waves. The
legal paper granting this permission is called a license.
In some types of radio (“services”), every transmitter has
a license. For example, all broadcasting stations are required to
be licensed. An organization might have a license to cover all
of its transmitters. Your local police department would have one
license for its base station and all of the radios in its cars and
handheld radios used by its officers.
In other types of radio, some central transmitters are
licensed, but others are not. For example, phone companies
need licenses for their cellphone sites, but individual cellphone
users are not licensed. In the amateur radio service,
the radios themselves are not licensed, but the operators
(“hams”) have licenses to operate any ham radio within the
limits of their license class.
Call Signs
Licensed transmitters (or, in the amateur radio service,
operators) are assigned a “name” by the FCC when they are
issued their license. This name is usually a combination of
letters, or letters and numbers, called a call sign. Each radio
service has different rules for what call signs look like and
how often they must be transmitted.
Call signs for U.S. broadcasting stations have either
three or four letters—for example, WOR in New York City,
or KABC in Los Angeles. Call signs for broadcasters east of
the Mississippi River start with the letter W, and broadcasters
Some types of
radios (garage
door openers,
wireless network
cards in laptops)—
usually those
that are very low
power—are not
licensed at all.


RADIO 13
.What Is Radio?
west of the Mississippi River start with K. There are a few
exceptions, such as Pittsburgh’s KDKA or WFAA in Dallas, but
most follow the rule. Broadcast stations in the United States are
required to identify themselves with their call signs on the
hour; most will do so several times each hour.
A broadcaster may have several stations in different broad-
casting services using the same call sign, in which case the
letters AM, FM, or TV follow the call sign. WSKG-FM is used
by public radio in Binghamton, New York, and WSKG-TV is the
public television station. Some radio stations networks may have
related call signs, as in WJIV, WBIV, WSIV, and a few others
that once made up the “ivy” network in central New York.
Ham Call Signs
In the amateur radio service, each set of calls is unique. The
beginning (prefix) of the call sign indicates the country: W, K,
N, or A for the United States; VE for Canada; XE for Mexico, for
example. In the United States the first letter may be followed by
another letter, then always by a number, which tells you where
the ham was first licensed (the call district). These numbers are
assigned roughly clockwise around the country, starting with
1 for New England, 2 for New York or New Jersey, 3 for the
mid-Atlantic states, and so on, to 9 and 0 in the Midwest.
Canadian ham call signs use a similar system, going from east
to west with VE1 in Nova Scotia and VE7 in British Columbia.
The last one to three letters are usually assigned alphabeti-
cally from the unused combinations at the time the call sign
was issued. In most cases the suffix letters following the
number are meaningless. In the past, some organizations were
able to get special call signs, like Scouting America’s ham radio
station K2BSA, or the Smithsonian’s NN3SI. The FCC now has
a “vanity call sign” procedure. A ham may request a specific
call sign if it is not assigned to someone else. Many Scouters
have calls with “BSA” suffixes. Many hams have come up with
sayings to make their call signs easier to remember, such as “K
two little furry bunnies” for K2LFB.
A ham who moves to another call district will still have
the same call sign. So, if you hear a “W6,” the ham may
be in California or may have received the call letters in
that state but is now living in Maine.
Canadian broad-
casting stations
have call signs
starting with C,
as in CFAX in
Vancouver or
CBN in St. John’s,
Newfoundland.


14 RADIO
What Is Radio?.
Phonetic Alphabet
Many letters sound similar. Over the radio it can be hard to
make out the differences between C, E, V, and Z, or B, P, and T,
or S and F, and so on, especially when a radio station is weak
or there is static. Things can get even more confusing when one
of the operators is more familiar with the alphabet the way it is
pronounced in another language. In Spanish, for instance, the
letter E is pronounced like a long A, as in day. So if you hear a
ham in Mexico say a long A, which letter does it mean?
W, K, N, A—United States
VE, VO, XJ—Canada
XE—Mexico
PY—Brazil
G—Great Britain
F—France
I—Italy
4X, 4Z—Israel
JA—Japan
ZL—New Zealand
Here are some common prefixes:
This map shows what number will be in your amateur radio
call sign, depending on where you live when you first get your
license. For example, if you live in California, your call sign will
contain a 6. You will keep that call sign even if you move to
another call district.


RADIO 15
.What Is Radio?
To help make themselves understood, radio operators use a
phonetic alphabet. A phonetic alphabet uses a word to stand for
each letter the operator is trying to get across. If your name is
Ted, you would spell your name as “Tango Echo Delta.” If it is
Dan, you would say “Delta Alfa November.” If there is static
and you spelled out your name only as “D-A-N” instead of
saying “Delta Alfa November,” the listener might hear “B-E-N.”
Many letters sound alike when the signal is hard to hear.
Many phonetic alphabets have been used over the years,
and the military uses its own system. Most civilian radio users
now use the following standard set by the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU) and International Civil
Aviation Organization (ICAO).
A—Alfa (AL-fah)
B—Bravo (BRAH-voh)
C—Charlie (CHAR-lee or
SHAR-lee)
D—Delta (DELL-tah)
E—Echo (ECK-oh)
F—Foxtrot (FOKS-trot)
G—Golf (GOLF)
H—Hotel (hoh-TELL)
I—India (IN-dee-ah)
J—Juliet (JEW-lee-ett)
K—Kilo (KEY-loh)
L—Lima (LEE-mah)
M—Mike (MIKE)
N—November (no-VEM-ber)
O—Oscar (OSS-cah)
P—Papa (PAH-pah)
Q—Quebec (keh-BECK)
R—Romeo (ROW-me-oh)
S—Sierra (see-AIR-rah)
T—Tango (TANG-go)
U—Uniform (YOU-nee-form or
OO-nee-form)
V—Victor (VIK-tah)
W—Whiskey (WISS-key)
X—Xray (ECKS-ray)
Y—Yankee (YANG-key)
Z—Zulu (ZOO-loo)
Standard ITU/ICAO Phonetics
This list of words is used for the phonetic alphabet.


16 RADIO
What Is Radio?.
How Radio Waves Travel
Radios use AC, or alternating current, like the electricity that
comes from the outlets in your house. (You may also be
familiar with DC, or direct current, as is produced by
batteries.) The AC electric power that lights your
room reverses or alternates from positive to nega-
tive and back, 60 times each second. We can say
its frequency of alternating is 60 times (cycles) per
second, or 60 hertz.
As the frequency of alternating current gets
higher than about 10,000 hertz, the signal no lon-
ger wants to stay in the wire. Thus, at frequencies
above 10,000 Hz, alternating current becomes radio
frequencies, or RF. If the length of the wire is right,
the signal leaves the wire (now an antenna) and goes
through the air, like the light from a light bulb. As you
read this, millions of those signals are zipping through
your body (luckily they don’t tickle).
Think about that light bulb for a minute. If you are stand-
ing close enough, you see the glow of the bulb. Even if you
can’t see the bulb itself, you might see its light shining
on the walls of the room. What if the bulb were behind your
house? You could still see its light reflected off the picture
window in the house next door.
Radio signals travel the same way as the light from the
bulb. If your receiving antenna can actually “see” the transmit-
ting antenna, you will receive the signal directly. This is called
line-of-sight reception, and that is how very high frequency
(VHF) and ultra high frequency (UHF) signals are most
often received.
Most local radio reception, especially on the AM radio
broadcast band during the day, is like seeing the bulb
scattering light from the walls of the room. This is called
ground wave because the signal hugs the ground, traveling
along Earth’s surface.
A band is a range of frequencies. AM radio stations
transmit within the medium-wave band from 535 to
1605 kHz. The shortwave band ranges from 3 to 30 MHz.
FM stations transmit within a very high frequency (VHF)
band from 88 to 108 MHz.
One hertz (Hz)
equals one cycle
per second. One
kilohertz (kHz)
equals 1,000 hertz.
One megahertz
(MHz) equals
1,000,000 hertz,
or 1,000 kHz.
One gigahertz
(GHz) equals
1,000,000,000
hertz, or
1,000 MHz.


RADIO 17
.What Is Radio?
How can you explain being able to hear a distant station
when your receiving antenna is too far away to “see” the
transmitting antenna? Just as the light bulb reflects from the
window next door, so radio waves seem to reflect from a
“mirror” in the sky—the layers of air between 40 and 300 miles
up called the ionosphere. Radio waves may bounce (“skip”)
from the ionosphere back to Earth, and up again, all the way
around the world.
The layers are also affected by variations in the sun’s light
caused by sunspots and other effects. This is why the distance
a radio transmitter may be heard (propagation) varies with the
time of day, season, and the 11-year sunspot cycle.
As a rule, signals in the AM broadcast band (535 kHz
to 1605 kHz) are limited to the relatively short distances of
ground-wave propagation during the day, since this is when the
lower layers of the ionosphere are thickest and absorb the signals.
At night, these layers become thinner, and the AM signals can
pass through and be bent to “skip” down much farther away.
The ionosphere is made up of air that is electrically charged by the sun
and shaped by Earth’s magnetic field. Radio waves entering the layers
of the ionosphere can be bent and reflected back to Earth, or they can be
absorbed by the ionosphere, or they may pass through the ionosphere,
depending on the radio frequency and the height and thickness of the
ionosphere’s layers. The height and thickness of the layers will change as
the angle and amount of sunlight changes over the day and the seasons
of the year.
NEW
YORK
CITY
GROUND
WAVES SKIP DISTANCE
CHICAGO
SKIP
ZONE
2ND HOP
SKIP DISTANCE
IONOSPHERE
2ND
HOP
DENVER 2ND SKIP
ZONE
SAN FRANCISCO
When you transmit a radio wave, it goes toward
the ionosphere and skips back to Earth.


What Is Radio?.
On the other hand, signals in the range of about 10 MHz to
30 MHz are bent by this thicker daytime layer, so they are use-
ful for worldwide communications during the day. But at night,
as the layer thins, it becomes too thin to bend the waves, and
these signals are no longer capable of long-distance “skip.”
Knowing the Propagation
A good check of radio propagation (the ability of radio signals
to travel from one place to another) is to listen to radio station
WWV in Colorado, or its sister station WWVH in Hawaii,
operated by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(NIST). These stations broadcast on exact frequencies of 2.5,
5, 10, and 15 MHz. WWV also broadcasts on 20 MHz and
experimentally on 25 MHz. These frequencies are in the
shortwave radio spectrum.
The stations transmit a continuous “beep-beep” at one-
second intervals, with a voice identification of each station’s
call sign each minute, sometimes with additional information
including time corrections, “space weather” reports such as
solar storms that affect radio communications, marine storm
warnings, and Global Positioning System (GPS) status reports.
WWVH identifies at 15 seconds before the minute, WWV
immediately afterward. By tuning to each of the WWVH and
WWV frequencies, a listener can get a good idea of how loud
signals on these radio frequencies will be from ham radio
stations or other radio services located in the West and the
Pacific areas.
International time stations like CHU in Ottawa, Canada, and
Mainflingen B in Germany, below, are scattered around the world.
By knowing the propagation, you can choose the band to listen
to that is best for the distance that interests you.


RADIO 19
.What Is Radio?
What Is DX?
Radio stations that are not local to your area are called DX,
the Morse code abbreviation for “distance.” It isn’t possible to
provide a definition of DX as a number of miles, so that you
could measure on a map when a station becomes DX. In some
ham radio bands, like the 20-meter band at 14.0 to 14.35 MHz,
where normal propagation is in the thousands of miles, a DX
station usually is considered to be anyone outside your home
country. In other bands like the 2-meter band at 144 to 148
MHz, where normal propagation is very short range, a station
in the next state might be “DX.” In any case, you can tell
the DX station because it is the one everyone is likely trying
to reach.
The FCC and the ITU
When radio began, the radio frequency spectrum was not
regulated. Each user built a station and got on the air. The
result was a mess. Even worse, the earliest “spark gap” radio
transmitters simply used a big spark to create static, which
was turned on and off to form the dots and dashes of Morse
code characters. Each transmitter’s “frequency” depended on
its antenna’s length, but basically every transmitter’s signal was
heard everywhere up and down the bands. Two Scouts talking
across town on homemade transmitters could interfere with
ships at sea—and anyone else trying to communicate.
Spark was outlawed in the 1920s, which helped some.
At the same time, radio broadcasting became popular and
broadcast stations began to multiply like weeds. Everyone
wanted to start a radio station. Without regulation, that is
just what they did.
Finally, the world’s countries got together to divide the
radio spectrum into bands or groups of frequencies. Each band
is assigned to one or more services or types of users, such as
military or government use, broadcasting, amateur (ham) radio,
etc. In this country, a U.S. government agency, the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC), was formed in 1927
(it was called the Federal Radio Commission back then).
The commission became responsible for regulating the use
of these bands by users in the various radio services within
the United States.


20 RADIO
What Is Radio?.
Today, the FCC regulates who gets to use what frequencies,
and issues licenses to radio stations, transmitters, and operators.
In each service, the FCC decides which users require licensing.
For example, amateur service operators must take an FCC test
to get their “ham” licenses, while in the broadcasting service
each transmitter is licensed, but the on-the-air person-
ality at the microphone does not need a license.
The FCC does not have
authority outside the United States,
Puerto Rico, and U.S. territories. Global
telecommunications networks and
services are coordinated by the International
Telecommunication Union (ITU), headquartered
in Geneva, Switzerland.
The FCC is responsible for setting
and enforcing technical standards
for anything that generates
radio frequencies. Look at your
garage door remote control or
your cellphone; you may find
a label saying it complies with
FCC rules.
“The ITU Radiocommunication Sector (ITU-R) plays a vital role in the
global management of the radio-frequency spectrum and satellite orbits—
limited natural resources which are increasingly in demand from a large
and growing number of services such as fixed, mobile, broadcasting,
amateur, space research, emergency telecommunications, meteorology,
global positioning systems, environmental monitoring, and communica-
tion services—that ensure safety of life on land, at sea, and in the skies.”
—from itu.int/ITU-R


RADIO 21
.What Is Radio?
How Radio Waves Carry Information
A pure radio signal does not convey any information; it’s just
there. While a continuous radio signal might be of some use as
a homing beacon, if you want to communicate using radio you
must find a way to put information onto the signal.
Morse Code
Spelling out words by Morse code is fun and useful. The sim-
plest way to put information on the signal is to turn it on and
off in a recognizable pattern or code. That is exactly what ham
operators do when using Morse code—they turn a simple con-
tinuous wave (CW) produced by a transmitter on and off in a
series of long and short transmissions. Then, someone using a
receiver detects whether the signal is there or not, and figures
out from the pattern what was said.
Hams use the words dit and dah to represent the short and
long sounds of the Morse code. The letter A is “di-dah,” B is
“dah-di-di-dit,” C is “dah-di-dah-dit,” and so on. Morse code
works well under poor conditions for listening and hearing.
The human ear is good at translating faint beeps amid static
into letters. However, Morse code is a slow means of communi-
cation (15 to 20 words per minute is typical of on-the-air
conversations), and machines have trouble interpreting the
varying-length letters and spaces.
Modulation
Before long, people wanted to transmit sounds (audio) over the
radio—that is, voices and music. To do that, you must combine
the audio with the continuous radio signal (the carrier). This
combination of audio and carrier is called modulation.
There are basically two ways to modulate a carrier with
sounds or other signals. You can change the strength (amplitude)
of the signal, which is called amplitude modulation or AM.
Or you can change the frequency of the signal, which is called
frequency modulation or FM. (Now you know what the AM and
FM on your clock radio mean.) Television is a combination of
AM (for the picture) and FM (for the sound).


22 RADIO
What Is Radio?.
Today, more and more communications signals are being
sent digitally. Digital satellite radio and television have been
around for some time, and digital broadcast radio and TV are
starting to replace the older AM and FM systems. Digital mobile
phones have completely replaced the original analog cellphone
system. All of these digital radio and TV systems, whether
the signals are sent by satellites or earthly transmitters, use a
system of shifting transmit frequency to send binary numbers—
“ones” or “zeroes.” They shift very quickly. Computers on each
end can translate sound and pictures to digital numbers and
back again without interrupting the show you are watching
or listening to.
Analog vs. Digital
Ordinary voice, radio, and television
signals are analog; the signals range
over a continuous spectrum of values.
Think of a glass thermometer that uses
a column of mercury to indicate the
temperature. The mercury continually
rises and falls with changes of
temperature. Compare that to
a digital thermometer that shows
the temperature in distinct
numerical digits rather than by
a continuously moving liquid.
Analog communications
signals can be digitized to
be transmitted as the
binary digits (“bits”)
1 and 0.
Ham radio
operators use a
variety of amplitude
modulation called
single sideband
(SSB) on the
shortwave bands,
and mostly FM on
the VHF and UHF
bands. Citizens
band radios are
mostly AM
(although some
use SSB, too).
Family Radio
Service (FRS)
handheld radios
use FM, as do
most police and
fire radios.


RADIO 23
.What Is Radio?
Radio Communications: Basic Equipment
Let’s look at a ham operator talking to a friend on the other
side of the world, and see what parts are required. The ham
talks into a microphone, which turns the voice into electrical
energy. The transmitter part of the ham’s transceiver uses that
energy to modulate the radio-frequency carrier. The modulated
signal is then sent to the antenna along a feed line and leaves
the antenna as a radio signal. An operator who wants a more
powerful signal can amplify it by using an amplifier between
the transceiver and the antenna.
At the receiving station, the process happens in reverse.
The receiving antenna picks up the radio signal. The signal
goes down a feed line to another transceiver, where a radio
frequency (RF) amplifier in the receiver part makes it strong
enough to hear (the signal at the antenna can be very weak—
maybe several millionths of a watt). Then, a detector extracts
the audio part of the signal. The audio frequency (AF) energy
is amplified by another amplifier, and a speaker reproduces the
sound for the receiving operator to hear.
A transmitter
and receiver
combined in one
box is called a
transceiver.


24 RADIO
The most efficient length for an antenna
is related to the wavelength of the signal. The
towers used at broadcast stations, or the whip
antennas on police cars, are most often one-
quarter or five-eighths of a wavelength tall.
A horizontal dipole antenna is often used
by ham radio operators. It’s a simple wire,
one-half wavelength long.
Antennas with several elements,
called “yagis” (yag-eez) or “beams,” allow
the signal to be sent or received in one
direction better than others. These anten-
nas are used for TV reception, where the TV transmitter
is far away, or on a rotator by ham operators so they can
direct their signal to the part of the world they want to
communicate with.
The Electromagnetic Spectrum
The electromagnetic spectrum is the range of frequencies from
DC through audio, radio, and light waves (infrared to visible
light to ultraviolet), X-rays, and gamma rays. For the Radio
merit badge, you will be interested in the radio part of the
spectrum—around 0.3 MHz to 3.0 GHz.
RADIO
MICROWAVE
INFRARED HEAT ULTRAVIOLET
GAMMA
RADIATION
X-RAY
VISIBLE
LIGHT
WAVELENGTH INCREASES ENERGY INCREASES
The electromagnetic spectrum
Operation on the amateur radio 160-meter frequency
band needs an antenna 80 meters (240 feet) long.
That takes a pretty big yard!
Look at all of the
radios in your
home and car to
see what radio
frequencies you
can hear.
What Is Radio?.


RADIO 25
.What Is Radio?
Radio waves travel through space at the speed of light
(186,000 miles per second). The distance a radio signal travels
in one cycle (positive to negative and back again) is called
its wavelength. The higher the frequency, the shorter the
wavelength. Ham operators and shortwave listeners (SWLs)
usually use the wavelength of signals to group radio frequencies
into bands. Signals on the 20-meter ham radio band, for
instance, have wavelengths of about 20 meters (66 feet).
The radio spectrum is divided into ranges.
Microwaves have frequencies higher than about 1,000 MHz
(1 GHz), which includes much of the UHF range and all of the
SHF and EHF.
You will also see the prefix giga (G) used with
frequencies. Giga means one billion, so 1.0 GHz is
1,000 MHz. Commonly used metric words (prefixes)
for fractions are milli (m), one thousandth, and micro
(μ), one millionth.
Low frequency (LF) 30 to 300 kHz
Medium frequency (MF) 300 to 3000 kHz
High frequency (HF),
also known as shortwave 3 to 30 MHz
Very high frequency (VHF) 30 to 300 MHz
Ultra high frequency (UHF) 300 to 3,000 MHz
Super high frequency (SHF) 3 to 30 GHz
Extremely high frequency (EHF) 30 to 300 GHz


26 RADIO
What Is Radio?.
Look at the spectrum chart shown here. It shows where
the various users of the radio spectrum (“services”) fit. You
should be able to locate at least eight of these services for your
merit badge counselor. Locate the services that best match the
option you choose in requirement 9 for the Radio merit badge.
That is, if you choose the amateur radio option, you will find it
most helpful to locate the various amateur radio bands.
Most radio services are located in a given area of the
spectrum because something about the signals used by the
service needs to be in that spot. For example, shortwave
broadcasting is on several HF bands so that long-distance
broadcasts to most of the world can be made 24 hours a day.
Police are on VHF and UHF because these bands generally are
good only for the short-range work of police radio needs.
Cellphones are in the UHF and SHF spectrum, because the
cellphone system works by keeping the range of any base
station (“cell”) short, so that the frequencies can be reused by
another nearby cell—which is why you see so many cellphone
towers along every highway. Other radio services are where
they are for purely historical reasons.


RADIO 27
.What Is Radio?
To see a detailed spectrum chart with all of the frequency allocations for
the United States, visit ntia.gov/page/united-states-frequency-allocation-
chart on the website of the National Telecommunications and Information
Administration, Office of Spectrum Management. Be sure to get your
parent or guardian’s permission first.
Many ham radio operators use Morse code. These short and long sounds (di, dit, dah)
are formed when the switch (key) opens or closes the electrical circuit. You can earn
the Morse Code Interpreter Strip by sending and receiving Morse code at five words
per minute.
RADIO 27
A di-dah • —
B dah-di-di-dit — • • •
C dah-di-dah-dit — • — •
D dah-di-dit — • •
E dit •
F di-di-dah-dit • • — •
G dah-dah-dit — — •
H di-di-di-dit • • • •
I di-dit • •
J di-dah-dah-dah • — — —
K dah-di-dah — • —
L di-dah-di-dit • — • •
M dah-dah — —
N dah-dit — •
O dah-dah-dah — — —
P di-dah-dah-dit • — — •
Q dah-dah-di-dah — — • —
R di-dah-dit • — •
S di-di-dit • • •
T dah —
U di-di-dah • • —
V di-di-di-dah • • • —
W di-dah-dah • — —
X dah-di-di-dah — • • —
Y dah-di-dah-dah — • — —
Z dah-dah-di-dit — — • •
1 di-dah-dah-dah-dah • — — — —
2 di-di-dah-dah-dah • • — — —
3 di-di-di-dah-dah • • • — —
4 di-di-di-di-dah • • • • —
5 di-di-di-di-dit • • • • •
6 dah-di-di-di-dit — • • • •
7 dah-dah-di-di-dit — — • • •
8 dah-dah-dah-di-dit — — — • •
9 dah-dah-dah-dah-dit — • • • •
0 dah-dah-dah-dah-dah — — — — —





RADIO 29
.Block Diagrams, Schematics, Modulation, and Cellphones
Block Diagrams,
Schematics, Modulation,
and Cellphones
A block diagram shows a system by diagramming it as connected
boxes (blocks). The blocks are usually major parts of the system.
In this block diagram, for example, the boxes represent a trans-
mitter, a receiver, a transceiver, an amplifier, and an antenna.
A schematic diagram or “schematic” of an electrical circuit
is a drawing that shows how that circuit is built. While the
blocks in the block diagram show major systems, a schematic
shows how individual electronic parts are put together to form
a system. In many cases, you may have both a block diagram
and a schematic of the same system.
The transceiver is a device that combines a transmitter (to send radio
signals) and a receiver (to receive radio signals). An amplifier makes the
transmitted signals stronger. The antenna receives radio signals from the
amplifier and sends them into the air, or picks up signals from the air for
the receiver to decode. The feed line is a cable that connects the trans-
ceiver to the antenna.
This block diagram shows the parts of a typical amateur radio station.
SPEAKER
MIC
TRANSCEIVER
RECEIVER
AMPLIFIER
ANTENNA
FEED LINE
TRANSMITTER


30 RADIO
Block Diagrams, Schematics, Modulation, and Cellphones.
For example, you could make a block diagram of a trans-
mitter with three blocks showing an oscillator (which produces
an alternating current of a certain frequency) feeding a carrier
to a modulator, which modulates the carrier and feeds it to an
amplifier, with lines between the boxes representing the carrier
and the modulated signal. Or, you could draw a schematic
of the transmitter showing the collection of electronic parts
(such as transistors, resistors, coils, and capacitors) that make
up the oscillator, modulator, and amplifier, and the wires
connecting them all.
Like a map, a schematic uses symbols in place of actual
drawings of electronic parts. A symbol is a picture that repre-
sents a thing, such as an image of an airplane on a map to
mean an airport. To read a schematic, you need to know what
the symbols represent. You can learn more about schematics as
well as electrical and electronic circuits by earning the
Electricity and Electronics merit badges.
This block diagram shows a simple crystal-controlled transmitter.
This is the schematic of the
circuit represented by the
box labeled “oscillator” in
the block diagram of the
crystal-controlled transmit-
ter. The schematic shows
individual electronic parts.
CRYSTAL
OSCILLATOR MODULATOR
AUDIO FROM
MICROPHONE
AMPLIFIER TO ANTENNA
OSC 120
+12T
L1
L2.005
10K
Q1
2N2222A
16
220
65
4700
50MHZ
THIRD
O.T.


RADIO 31
.Block Diagrams, Schematics, Modulation, and Cellphones
Modulation
With any radio signal there will be a center frequency,
which is called the carrier because it acts to carry the signal.
A continuous wave (CW) digital encoding system uses Morse
code to convey a message that turns the carrier on and off,
represented by dits and dahs in the code. The carrier is modu-
lated by the on and off keying. Other forms of modulation
include amplitude modulation (AM), frequency modulation
(FM), digital transmissions, and single sideband (SSB).
In amplitude modulation, the level of the carrier is
modulated by the message. You can see that the amplitude of
the overall waveform varies according to the frequency and
amplitude of the tone.
AMPLITUDE
MODULATING SIGNAL
MODULATED SIGNAL
TIME
CARRIER SIGNAL


32 RADIO
Block Diagrams, Schematics, Modulation, and Cellphones..
In frequency modulation, the carrier’s frequency is varied
by the modulating signal, while the amplitude remains the
same. You can see below that the frequency of the carrier
changes as a result of the amplitude of the modulating signal.
In both cases above, the carrier is being modulated by
audio signals. The carrier can also be modulated by digital
signals. In the next illustration, the modulating signal is an
on-off signal representing a computer-generated message. In
amplitude shift keying (ASK), the signal is turned on and off
just as with CW or Morse code. In frequency shift keying (FSK),
the frequency of the carrier is changed with each change in the
on-off keying, and with phase shift keying (PSK), the phase of
the carrier signal is changed.
Digital transmissions are used in radio to send messages
from computer to computer. The messages can then be decoded
at the receiver. For example, typed messages can be sent using
radio teletype signals. Digitally encoded audio and pictures can
also be transmitted.
INFORMATION SIGNAL
CARRIER SIGNAL
FM SIGNAL
AMPLITUDE
TIME
TIME
TIME


RADIO 33
.Block Diagrams, Schematics, Modulation, and Cellphones.
Another type of modulation is called single-sideband
(SSB). This is used in two-way communication and particularly
in amateur radio communication. It is a variation of amplitude
modulation (AM) that uses special techniques to limit the
transmitted power and bandwidth.
SSB does not transmit a carrier, and it transmits only one
of two sidebands that would normally be generated for AM.
Sidebands carry the modulated information, and with AM that
information is duplicated between the lower sideband and
the upper sideband. Transmitting only one sideband decreases
the width of the signal, and without a carrier, the power
requirements are greatly reduced.
However, to receive an SSB signal, your receiver must be
tuned to the exact frequency of the missing carrier—otherwise
the received signal will be distorted. You know what this
distortion sounds like if you have ever tuned in an SSB signal
and heard a change in tone or found the audio difficult
to understand.
BINARY
CODE 1 0 1 0 0 1
NRZ
ASK
FSK
PSK


34 RADIO
Block Diagrams, Schematics, Modulation, and Cellphones
Cellphones
Cellphones use radio waves to allow you to
communicate with friends and family. The phones
use digital transmissions to send not only voice but
also text messages and photos. Those same digital
signals are used to set the time and establish
your location.
A cellphone is actually a complete transceiver
with microphone, transmitter, antenna, receiver, and
speaker. In a real sense, the phone is a computer
that includes a display to show text messages,
photos, etc.
The cell-phone network consists of cell towers
placed close enough together that you never lose
radio coverage as you travel—well, almost never.
Sometimes, when you’re camping or on a road trip,
you may lose cell coverage.
The cell towers pick up your signal and send
signals back to your cellphone. The key cellular
aspect is the network that connects all of the cell
towers together and routes your phone call or
text to the phone you are calling. It also changes
that routing as you and the person you are talking
to move from the coverage of one cell tower
to the next.
Cellphones can be very helpful in emergencies.
However, when the emergencies are such that the
cell network is overwhelmed by the number of callers, or if a
tower or the telephone lines between towers are damaged, you
won’t be able to communicate until the cell traffic is reduced or
you move to coverage from another cell tower.
During an emergency, it is best to not add to the burden of
the cell system by trying to use it, but if necessary, a short text
message (like “I’m OK”) is more likely to get through than a
voice call.


RADIO 35
.Block Diagrams, Schematics, Modulation, and Cellphones
NOAA Weather Radio
A special radio service of the National Oceanic and
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) is the network of more
than a thousand radio stations continuously broadcasting
National Weather Service warnings, watches, forecasts, and
other information.
You can purchase low-cost radio receivers to monitor these
broadcasts. That includes battery-power receivers that you can
take with you on camping trips to monitor for any urgent
warnings and changing weather conditions. You can find more
information online, with your parent or guardian’s permission,
at weather.gov/nwr.


Circuit breaker panels provide protection in case of overload and allow you to turn off
power before working on any connected circuitry. Always follow the Radio Safety
Code on pages 37 and 38.


RADIO 37
.Safety Precautions
Safety Precautions
Operating a radio station is probably less dangerous than
riding in a car. To stay safe, you need to think about safety.
The following is a safety code based on guidelines from the
American Radio Relay League, the national association of
amateur radio operators. Read it and practice it.
Radio Safety Code
1. Unplug equipment before working on it and before touching
anything behind or inside the radio.
2. Never let anyone turn the power on and off for you when
you are working on a radio.
3. Do not work on a radio when you are tired or sleepy.
Never work alone.
The most dangerous shock you can receive is one that goes from
one hand to the other, directly through the heart. A current of as
little as 10 milliamps (0.01 amps) can be fatal if it passes through
your heart. Be very careful around any electrical power.


38 RADIO
Safety Precautions.
4. Never adjust internal electrical components bare-handed.
Use the proper plastic or insulated tools, and be sure the
insulation is in good condition.
5. To prevent your body from becoming the return path from
a voltage source to the ground, don’t touch grounded metal
(like radiators or water pipes) or wet floors when you are
working on radio equipment. Never handle equipment with
wet hands—water is a good conductor.
6. Never wear headphones while working on radios.
7. Keep one hand in your pocket when working on radios.
That way, if you do touch a “hot” point, the electricity
cannot travel across your chest and cause a heart attack.
8. Tell your family how to turn the power off and how to give
artificial respiration. Be sure you are up-to-date in first aid.
9. Take the time to be careful; death is permanent.
Be especially careful when putting up antennas. Do so only
with your parent or guardian’s permission and direct supervi-
sion. Be sure the antenna cannot touch a power line if it falls or
while you are carrying it into position. People have been killed
while they were lifting an antenna into place when the antenna
touched a live electrical wire. Never run a wire antenna over or
under power lines.
Read and follow the manufacturer’s
advice for safety on a ladder. Think
about each step before you take it.
Test each step before putting your
full weight on the rung. Follow the
three-point rule: Keep three parts
of your body (two feet and a hand,
or two hands and a foot) in
contact with the ladder at all
times. Also, be cautious about
loose roof shingles, which can
pull out and cause a fall.
Electricity won’t
give you a break
because you are a
beginner. Develop
good safety habits
now so that you
can enjoy your
hobby for a
long time.


RADIO 39
.Safety Precautions
Grounding
All equipment must be connected to a good ground—preferably
to a long metal rod driven into the earth (which is why it is
called a “ground”). There is probably a ground rod near where
the power comes into your house; the electrical boxes will be
connected to that rod through the ground or neutral wire in the
house wiring. Connecting the case of radio equipment to a
ground reduces the possibility of electrical shock should a piece
of equipment fail and the radio chassis or cabinet becomes
connected to the power line or some high-voltage source in the
radio—that is, it becomes electrically “hot.”
If connected properly, three-wire power cables plugged
into three-wire grounded power outlets, or two-wire plugs with
one larger pin plugged into polarized outlets, will connect the
chassis to ground through your house wiring. But most amateur
radio operators prefer to drive a separate ground rod close by,
just for their station. A ground system to prevent shock is
generally referred to as “DC ground.”
Another feature of the grounding system is to provide a
path to ground for any stray radio-frequency (RF) current inside
the station. Stray RF can cause equipment to malfunction. Also,
a good RF ground is important to make the whole station work
at its best; the ground provides the “return path” for the radio
waves you are sending out.
Antennas may be hit by lightning and you must provide
a path to ground for the energy from lightning strikes. Ground
antenna feed lines to safely bleed off static buildup during
electrical storms. Many operators put lightning protectors in
their feed lines where the lines enter the house. These devices
provide a safe path for static to discharge to ground, even if the
feed line is still connected to the radio.
Nothing can protect your radio against a direct
lightning hit, or even a nearby strike. During stormy
weather, unplug radio equipment from power outlets
and disconnect the antenna feed line at the back of
the radio.


While in orbit aboard the International Space Station, astronaut Sunita Williams used
radios to communicate with NASA’s Johnson Space Center. Using amateur radio she
also communicated with Scouts at the National Scouting Museum during the annual
Jamboree on the Air in 2012. With your parent or guardian’s permission, watch a video
of this contact at youtube.com/watch?v=nuPj3yd8ByU.


RADIO 41
.Amateur Radio
Amateur Radio
“… WB2JWD DE K2BSA/8 – OK MIKE TNX FER CALL – QTH IS
THE 2023 NATIONAL SCOUT JAMBOREE, SUMMIT BECHTEL
RESERVE, WEST VIRGINA …
“WA2EOW this is 4Z4HS – four zulu four hotel sierra or
happy Scouts – the Sea Scout club in Tel Aviv, Israel – nice to
talk to you in the Jamboree-on-the-Air, Doug …”
“This is VEØMCM … we’ve been adrift in high seas for
three days … location unknown …”
“… KC4US, we’re in Little America, Antarctica …”
Amateur “ham” radio is a gateway to the world
for millions of people around the globe. During the
10 days of the 2023 National Scout Jamboree, Scouts
at amateur radio station K2BSA made 1,727 contacts
with people across the country and worldwide.
Counselors onsite taught Radio merit badge classes,
resulting in 309 Scouts earning the badge. At
previous Jamborees, K2BSA contacted astronauts and
cosmonauts aboard the International Space Station,
the U.S. space shuttle, and the Russian space station
Mir.
Scouts who take part in
Jamboree-on-the-Air, or JOTA,
receive a special patch.
During the third weekend in October, Scouts and
Scouters on every continent get together for a
Jamboree-on-the-Air. What is JOTA? It’s the largest
Scouting event in the world, a time when any Scout can
find a ham radio operator and get on the air to talk to
other Scouts. You might talk to Scouts in Africa, Europe,
and South America with more than 1 million Scouts on
the air from more than 150 countries.


42 RADIO
Amateur Radio.
Ham radio isn’t only for fun. Hams everywhere practice the
Scout motto, “Be Prepared.” Hams regularly prepare for disasters
by setting up mock emergencies, which they call Simulated
Emergency Tests. During earthquakes, tornadoes, and floods,
amateur radio operators have been the only lifeline for emergency
messages. Hams also provide public service communications for
events like parades, foot races, and bike rallies.
What Else Can You Do?
The sky is the limit in ham radio. Hams have
built more than 150 satellites—the only space
vehicles ever built that can be used by anyone
from any country, free of charge. As a ham,
you can talk to other hams via Morse code,
voice, or television. You can hook up your
home computer and let it “talk” to other computer
enthusiasts over the radio through packet radio, or use the
computer’s sound card to send and receive pictures through
slow-scan television (SSTV).
During emergencies, ham radio operators handle messages
for disaster relief agencies like the American Red Cross.


RADIO 43
.Amateur Radio
You can talk to people in Antarctica or to someone next
door. If you talk to someone for a half-hour, you can earn the
Rag Chewers’ Club certificate. You can earn an award for talking
to a ham on each of six continents: North America, South
America, Asia, Europe, Africa, and Oceania (which includes
Australia and Antarctica). If that is too easy, there is an award
for talking to hams in every state or in a hundred countries.
Field Day is a test of how well ham radio operators can set
up in times of emergencies. You can take part in a Field Day
contest and see how many other hams you can talk to in a
weekend while operating in a tent, without using power from
the electric company.
The outdoors and amateur radio are made for each other.
On almost any weekend you can talk to other hams who have
set up portable outdoor stations for the “Parks On The Air.”
Some venture even farther, climbing up mountain peaks to
operate from “Summits On The Air.”
Hams come from all walks of life. The voice at the other end
could belong to a U.S. senator, an astronaut, or an eighth-
grader. The ham you hear could be hiking in the mountains or
sitting in a wheelchair. The Morse code coming from your
receiver might be from a ship’s radio operator, or from the hand
of a Scout making radio contact for the first time. It’s all first
names on the air, so the only way to know is to ask.
There is nothing like throwing a wire antenna over a tree
branch and hooking it up to your radios to talk around
the world on a summer afternoon in Scout camp, or
during long winter evenings camping with the troop.
Why does the government allow amateur radio
operators to talk on so many different radio
frequencies? Ham radio operators have always assisted
in times of emergency or provided community service.
The FCC’s purpose for allowing hams to take part in the
hobby is to increase the number of electronics experts,
to improve goodwill with other countries, to assist with
emergency communications, and to experiment
with radio and communications.


44 RADIO
Amateur Radio.
What’s With the Funny Nickname?
Why are amateur radio operators called “hams”? There are a
number of explanations, but the most likely, according to the
American Radio Relay League, is this: In the old days of land-
line (wired) telegraphy, a poor operator was called a “ham”—
perhaps because it sounded more like the key was being hit
with a ham than with the operator’s fingers. When radio started
in the early 20th century, the only trained telegraph operators
available worked for the landline telegraph companies, so they
were the ones hired to handle the radios in ships and coastal stations.
In those early days, every transmitter used the whole
spectrum with a broad spark signal: basically, they all
transmitted static. Two amateurs communicating with each
other across town could effectively jam all the other operations
in the area. The ship-to-shore operators complained to one
another about interference from amateurs and would call them
by the insulting name “hams.” The amateurs, hearing this, and
possibly not knowing the real meaning of the word, said:
“That’s it—we’re hams!”
The name stuck. Since then, the original meaning has been
forgotten, and “ham” has come to mean “amateur radio operator.”


RADIO 45
.Amateur Radio
Shortcuts and Q Signals
Over the years that hams have been using Morse code, they have
developed a sort of “radio language.” Some of it is borrowed
from the other radio services many early hams started in or
listened to, like the military, ship-to-shore, railroad, or telegraph
services. Most “Q” signals, for example, were adopted by inter-
national treaty for use in the ship-to-shore service so that ships
from any nation could communicate with any other ship or
shore station, regardless of what language the operator spoke.
Other parts were developed by hams. Wherever the radio
language came from, its purpose is for easy communications
between hams who might not speak the other’s language.
The first part of radio language is the special signals that
divide up radio messages and indicate intentions. (A bar over
the letters means they are sent as a single character run
together, not as two distinct characters.)
Next are Q signals. While Q signals are most common in
Morse code and digital (“teletype”) operations, you will hear
some of them on voice as well. These are three-letter combina-
tions starting with the letter Q. Each is a message in itself,
with two meanings—one with a question mark following, one
without. For example, “QTH?” means “What is your location?”
while “QTH” means “My location is . . . ”
The most common radio signals are:
CQ—“Calling any radio amateur”
DE—“From” (“WB2JWD DE K2BSA,” for example)
BT—(a break in the text)
AR—End of message
K—“Over” (any station is invited to transmit)
R—“OK” (transmission received in full)
SK—“Out” (end of contact)
There are many more Q signals than are normally used by hams, but most
of these deal with situations that rarely arise (“QTO?” means “Have you
left port?”). Some Q signals have developed a different meaning in ham
radio usage than in the international treaty. For example, “QRP” means
“Please reduce your power” in the international definition, but to a U.S.
ham operator it means “low power operation.”


46 RADIO
Amateur Radio.
The most useful Q signals are:
QRM?—“Is my radio signal being interfered with by
man-made noise?”
QRM—Interference. (“Your radio signal is being
interfered with.”)
QRN?—“Is my radio signal being interfered with by
atmospheric noise, static?”
QRN—Static. (“Your radio signal is being interfered
with by static.”)
QRP—Low power radio operation.
QRS—“Send your Morse code more slowly.”
QRT—Leaving the air. (“I’m stopping my radio activity.”)
QRX—“Wait a few minutes.”
QSB—“Your signals are fading.”
QSL—A card sent to indicate you’ve talked to or
heard a radio station; also, as a Q signal that means
“Received OK.”
QSO—A conversation.
QSY—“I am moving to another radio frequency. . . .”
QTH?—“What is your location?”
QTH—“My location is . . .”
And, two unofficial Q signals:
QST—“Calling all radio amateurs for a bulletin.”
QLF—“Try sending Morse code with your left foot
now.” (Sent as a joke to indicate that the other opera-
tor’s transmissions are hard to understand.)
Finally, here are abbreviations that have been invented
by hams and other Morse code users over the years.
Most hams use these to save time.
ABT—About.
AGN—Again.


RADIO 47
.Amateur Radio
BCNU—Be seeing you.
BK—Break, back (BK 2 U).
CPY—Copy (receive).
CUAGN—See you again.
CUL—See you later.
CW—Morse code.
DX—Long distance, foreign stations.
FB—Fine business (excellent).
GE—Good evening.
GL—Good luck.
HI—(A laugh; several usually are sent.)
HR—Here; hear.
HV—Have.
HW—How.
PSE—Please.
RPT—Repeat.
SIG—Signal.
TNX—Thanks.
U—You.
UR—Your.
VY—Very.
WX—Weather.
73—“Best regards.”
88—“Love and kisses.”
RST—Readability
Strength Tone
(signal rating;
599 equals a perfect
radio signal).


48 RADIO
Amateur Radio.k2bsa.net twitter.com/k2bsa_scoutingfacebook.com/k2bsa.scouting
K2BSA18th national scout Jamboree
Try to decode this typical Morse code or teletype radio
contact or QSO between two ham operators.
QSL Cards
After a radio contact, ham radio operators like to send the other
ham a QSL card confirming the conversation. A ham writes on
a QSL card the information from the radio contact, information
that is kept in a logbook. (A logbook is where hams record—
log—their radio contacts and keep notes on the interesting
things they talked about.)
QSL cards are
exchanged to confirm
radio contacts
between stations.
Some cards have
photos or drawings.
CQ CQ CQ DE K2BSA K2BSA K2BSA K
K2BSA DE WB2JWD WB2JWD AR
WB2JWD DE K2BSA BT
— TNX FOR CALL OM BT
— NAME IS LEE BT
— QTH SCOUT
JAMBOREE, FORT AP HILL, VA BT
— UR SIG RST 599 BT
— BK 2 U HW CPY OM? K
K2BSA DE WB2JWD WB2JWD R FB LEE GE 2 U BT
— NAME IS MIKE BT
— QTH
HARFORD, NY BT
— UR SIG 589 QSB BT
— QRS PSE? TNX K
WB2JWD DE K2BSA OK MIKE BT
— WX HR SUNNY AND HOT BT
— GOT 2 RUN CHOW
TIME BT
— 73 AND CUAGN K
K2BSA DE WB2JWD R FB OM 73 GL BT
— PSE QSL BT
— BCNU R K2BSA DE WB2JWD SK
—


RADIO 49
.Amateur Radio
QSL cards vary from simple postcards to multicolor certifi-
cates nice for framing. Many hams have their QSL cards printed
commercially, but many others make up their own. The thing
all QSLs have in common is the information to properly con-
firm the contact:
• Your call sign and the other station’s call sign
• The time, date, and radio frequency band of the contact
• The mode (Morse code, voice, packet)
• A radio signal report (RST)
Your amateur radio logbook might look like this. Your entries can include date,
frequency, time, call signs, signal reports, and notes about the radio contact.
Even before you get your license, you can send
signal reports to hams you hear and request a QSL
in return. With your parent or guardian’s permission,
you can look up a ham’s call sign or name and
address on the American Radio Relay League’s
website at arrl.org/fcc/search.


50 RADIO
Amateur Radio.
The Licensing Ladder
You can become a ham radio operator. There is no age limit.
The youngest ham to receive a license in the United States was
5 years old. You can do it, too.
Technician: The Tenderfoot of Ham Radio
Your Technician Class license is the first ham radio “ticket”
to earn. It will be your passport to adventure on the airwaves.
Technician Class radio operators may sample just about
everything ham radio has to offer—from satellite communica-
tions and computerized packet radio to “chasing DX” (hunting
for stations in exotic countries). Technicians may use any mode
to communicate on the amateur radio bands above 50 MHz
(6 meters). This includes the very popular 144 to 148 MHz
(2-meter) and 420 to 450 MHz (70-centimeter) bands, where
repeaters can extend the range of a low-powered handheld
radio to 50 miles or more. These bands are great places to meet
local hams who can introduce you to the never-ending variety
of ham radio—and help you work toward a higher-class license.
REPEATER
CITY BCITY A
You can use a handheld radio while walking or driving to send your signal through a
repeater. By using repeaters, you can talk to people farther away.


.Amateur Radio
As a Technician Class operator, in addition to the VHF
and UHF bands above 50 MHz, you may also use frequencies
on the 10-meter HF band between 28.3 and 28.5 MHz to talk
with people all over the world. You can use Morse code on
four other HF frequency bands to make contacts up to a few
hundred miles away on the 80- and 40-meter radio frequency
bands, and up to several thousand miles away on the 15- and
10-meter radio frequency bands.
Once you earn the Radio merit badge, you will know
almost enough to become a Technician Class ham radio
operator, though it does require further study. You can take
a multiple-choice written exam at a volunteer exam session
through a local ham radio club or at a get-together of ham
operators (“Hamfest”) in your area. The test consists of 35
questions on basic regulations, operating practices, and elec-
tronics theory, with a focus on VHF and UHF applications. This
license gives you full amateur privileges, including permission
to transmit on repeaters on the popular 2-meter band.
The 70-centimeter (cm) and 1.2-gigahertz (GHz)
frequency bands include a couple of amateur TV
channels (yes, you can send your own TV signals)
and the chance to be a part of some of ham radio’s
newest developments. (What are they? We don’t
know—they haven’t happened yet!)


52 RADIO
Amateur Radio.
Higher License Classes
The Technician license is the first step on the ham radio
license ladder. Each higher class of license is a little
harder to earn, but each presents new privileges
and opportunities.
Step 2: General Class license. To get your
General Class license—a giant step up in
operating privileges—you will take another
35-question written test. This test covers
intermediate regulations, operating practices,
and electronics theory, with a focus on HF
applications. With your General Class license
under your belt, you can operate on at least
part of every amateur radio band from HF
through microwaves, in every permitted
transmission mode, at the full permitted power
level. The high-power HF privileges granted
to General licensees allow for cross-country and
worldwide communication.
Step 3: Extra Class license. For this license (think of it as the
Eagle Scout rank of ham radio), you will have to have passed
your Technician and General Class written tests, and then pass
a 50-question multiple-choice written test. Besides some of the
more obscure regulations, the test covers specialized operating
practices, advanced electronics theory, and radio equipment
design. The test is very difficult, but others have
passed it, and you can, too. With your Extra Class
license, you have every amateur radio privilege
available. You can operate any permitted mode
on any permitted frequency at the full legal
power limit. Also, you can act as a volunteer
examiner and help at volunteer exam
sessions, giving licensing tests to others.
For more information, contact
the American Radio Relay League
(see the resources section at the
end of this pamphlet). The ARRL has
many useful materials and can also
put you in touch with a local club or
instructor to help you.
Some people
prefer to earn the
General Class
license as their
first ticket, so they
may operate on
HF right away.


.Amateur Radio
RADIO 53
Be Prepared for an Emergency
We all hope never to have a real emergency, but just like
Scouts, hams want to be prepared for emergency communica-
tions. In fact, one of the most popular activities in ham radio is
public service through the Amateur Radio Emergency Service.
ARES teams prepare for real emergencies by helping out with
communications at canoe races, providing extra “eyes” for law
enforcement during large public events, and through simulated
emergency drills.
On Morse code or digital modes, the standard emergency
call is, as you might have guessed, SOS. No, “SOS” does not
stand for “Save Our Ship,” or for anything at all. It was chosen
because this simple sequence of three short, three long, and
three short (dididit–dahdahdah–dididit) characters was easy to
remember and recognize.
Because such a wide range
of frequencies is available, and
you cannot count on anyone
listening on any one frequency,
it is often necessary to repeat the
emergency call a few times to
get the attention of anyone tuning
by. An amateur using Morse
code in an emergency might
send, “SOS SOS SOS DE
WB2JWD WB2JWD K,” pause
for a reply, then repeat until you
get an answer.
On HF voice, the traditional
ham emergency call is “CQ
Emergency,” or you can use
the international distress call
“Mayday” (which comes from
the French m’aider, meaning
“help me”). As with Morse code,
you cannot count on anyone
listening just as you start
transmitting, so you would
repeat the emergency call three
times, then identify your station: “CQ Emergency CQ
Emergency CQ Emergency, this is WB2JWD Whiskey
Bravo Two Juliet Whiskey Delta . . . ” Then pause for a
reply and repeat.


54 RADIO
Amateur Radio.
In VHF repeater operation, where everyone listening to
the repeater can hear you, it isn’t necessary to send long calls.
Simply say what you mean: “This is WB2JWD, I have an
emergency—can anyone help?” Some repeaters encourage the
use of “Break Break” to interrupt a conversation in an emer-
gency; on others, you just say “Emergency” and your call sign.
Autopatch Operation
If you are using a repeater that has an emergency telephone
connection (autopatch), you can usually just dial 9-1-1 on the
keypad of your transceiver and be connected directly to an
emergency call center. If you are making a 9-1-1 call through a
repeater, remember several things. First, make sure the operator
knows that you are using a radio, so they don’t try to talk over
you and hang up when they can’t interrupt. Say: “I’m a ham
radio operator using a phone patch. I cannot hear you while
I’m talking, OK?”
Then, be sure you are connected to the right 9-1-1 center.
Wherever you are, the call will be routed to the 9-1-1 center for
the repeater’s phone—and the repeater might be on a moun-
taintop in another county many miles from where you are. Be
sure to give your location immediately to the operator—“I have
an emergency on Route 38 in Harford, New York, Cortland
County”—so if you do not have the right center you can be
transferred quickly.
Finally, since autopatch operation is nearly always one-way
(you can call 9-1-1, but they can’t call you), it would help if
you could line up another ham on the frequency before you
call, and have that person give the 9-1-1 operator his or her
number for a callback.
However you send the emergency call, before you send
it you need to think about what you will say when you
are answered. What information will you need to give
so you can get help?
• Remember “WWW”—What/Where/Who:
• What is the emergency?
• Where is the emergency?
• Who needs help, and what kind?


.Amateur Radio
Radios and Antennas
Most hams have a handheld radio operating on the VHF
2-meter or UHF 70-centimeter bands. Such a radio is often
called an “HT” after Motorola’s trademark Handie-Talkie®.
HTs are convenient to carry around, or they can be clipped to
your belt or put in a cellphone–type holster. If you have an
HT on your belt, it is helpful to have a combined speaker and
microphone (speaker-mike) that you can clip to your collar so
you can listen and talk without removing the HT from its place.
Other hams also have a radio they keep in their house,
usually called a base station. Base transceivers today are
small enough to fit on a desk or table, and the antenna
is outside—often mounted on the roof or chimney, or on its
own tower. Wire dipole or long-wire antennas can be strung
from the roof or chimney to a convenient tree. The antenna
feed lines can be led in through a window, or perhaps into a
basement and then up through the floor into the “ham shack.”
If outside antennas are not an option, they can sometimes
be mounted inside the attic. Smaller VHF antennas can be
taped to a window or along a wall.
Note: Get your
parent or
guardian’s
permission before
you start drilling
holes in the floor or
putting things on
the roof. You have
been warned!
Take a spare battery pack using replaceable AA or
AAA cells if you will be using your HT for an extended
period—say a week at Scout camp—or in a real emer-
gency when power to recharge the battery might not
be available.
RADIO 55


56 RADIO
Amateur Radio.
A radio that you would carry in your car could be either
a handheld model or a mobile radio that can be mounted
under the dashboard of a car. If you can drill holes in the
car (never without permission), it is best to mount the antenna
in the center of the roof or trunk lid, with the feed line run
inside the headliner or under the carpet. If that is not possible,
magnetic mounts are available, so that the antenna can be
stuck to the roof or trunk lid and the feed line fed through a
window or the trunk. A handheld radio will not work as well
in a car as it will outside (the car will interfere with sending
and receiving signals), unless it can be connected to an
exterior antenna.
U.S. Amateur Radio Frequencies and Bands
The chart on the next page shows the most commonly used
ham radio frequencies and bands. The ranges listed will give
you some idea of what to expect. They vary tremendously
depending, for the most part, upon sunspot activity. During
periods of high sunspot activity, you can get 24-hour worldwide
operation on the 10-, 15-, 20-, and 40-meter frequency bands.
During periods of low sunspot activity, you may find 10 and
15 meters to be useless even during the day.


RADIO 57
.Amateur Radio
23 cm (1240 MHz) *1240
1270 1295
1300
N (5 W )
E,A,G,T
MHz
33 cm (902 MHz) *
902.0 928.0 MHz
E,A,G,T
70 cm (420 MHz) *
420.0 450.0
E,A,G,T
MHz
1.25 Meters (222 MHz)
219.0 220.0
222.0 225.0
E,A,G,T
MHz
N (25 W )
2 Meters (144 MHz)
144.0
144.1
148.0
E,A,G,T
MHz
6 Meters (50 MHz)
50.0
50.1
54.0
E,A,G,T
MHz
10 Meters (28 MHz)
28.000
28.000
28.300
28.500
29.700 MHz
E,A,G
N,T
(200 W )
12 Meters (24 MHz)
24.890 24.930 24.990 MHz
E,A,G
N,T
(200 W )
15 Meters (21 MHz)
21.000
21.025
21.200
21.225
21.275
21.450 MHz
E
A
G
21.200
18.168 MHz18.11018.068
17 Meters (18 MHz)
E,A,G
20 Meters (14 MHz)
14.000
14.025 14.150
14.175
14.225
14.350 MHz
E
A
G
14.150
200 Watts PEP
30 Meters (10.1 MHz)
10.100 10.150 MHz
E,A,G
Avoid interference to fixed services outside the US.
See Sections 97.305(c), 97.307(f)(11) and
97.301(e).These exemptions do not apply to
stations in the continental US.
N,T
(200 W )
7.000
7.025
7.175
7.075 7.100
N,T outside region 2
7.300
E
MHz
A
G
7.125
ITU 1,3 and FCC region 2 west of
130° west or below 20° north
40 Meters (7 MHz)
2.8
kHz
General, Advanced, and Amateur Extra licensees
may operate on these five channels on a secondary
basis with a maximum effective radiated power
(ERP) of 100 W PEP relative to a half-wave dipole.
Permitted operating modes include upper sideband
voice (USB), CW, RTTY, PSK31 and other digital
modes such as PACTOR III. Only one signal at a
time is permitted on any channel.
60 Meters (5.3 MHz)
5330.5 5346.5 5357.0 5371.5 5403.5
5332 5348 5358.5 5373 5405
kHz
kHz
E,A,G
(100 W )
CW,
Dig
USB
80 Meters (3.5 MHz)
3.500
3.525
3.600 3.700
3.800
4.000
N,T
(200 W )
G
A
E
MHz
3.600
160 Meters (1.8 MHz)
1.800 1.900
E,A,G
MHz
Avoid interference to radiolocation operations
from 1.900 to 2.000 MHz
2.000
472 kHz 479 kHz
E,A,G
630 Meters (472 kHz)
5 W EIRP maximum, except in Alaska within 496
miles of Russia where the power limit is 1 W EIRP.
E,A,G
2,200 Meters (135 kHz)
135.7 kHz 137.8 kHz1 W EIRP maximum
Amateurs wishing to operate on either 2,200 or 630 meters must
first register with the Utilities Technology Council online at
https://utc.org/plc-database-amateur-notification-process/.
You need only register once for each band.
See ARRLWeb at www.arrl.org for
detailed band plans.
E = Amateur Extra
A = Advanced
G = General
T = Technician
N = Novice
= RTTY and data
= phone and image
= SSB phone
= CW only
= USB phone, CW, RTTY,
and data
= Fixed digital message
forwarding systems only
KEY
Note:
CW operation is permitted throughout all
amateur bands.
MCW is authorized above 50.1 MHz,
except for 144.0-144.1 and 219-220 MHz.
Test transmissions are authorized above
51 MHz, except for 219-220 MHz
ARRL Headquarters:
860-594-0200 (Fax 860-594-0259)
email: hq@arrl.org
Publication Orders:
www.arrl.org/shop
Toll-Free 1-888-277-5289 (860-594-0355)
email: orders@arrl.org
Membership/Circulation Desk:
www.arrl.org/membership
Toll-Free 1-888-277-5289 (860-594-0338)
email: membership@arrl.org
Getting Started in Amateur Radio:
Toll-Free 1-800-326-3942 (860-594-0355)
email: newham@arrl.org
Exams: 860-594-0300 email: vec@arrl.org
US Amateur Radio BandsUS AMATEUR POWER LIMITS — FCC 97.313 An amateur station must use the minimum transmitter power necessary
to carry out the desired communications. (b) No station may transmit with a transmitter power exceeding 1.5 kW PEP.
* Geographical and power restrictions may apply to all
bands above 420 MHz. See The ARRL Operating Manual
for information about your area.
All licensees except Novices are authorized all modes
on the following frequencies:
2300-2310 MHz
2390-2450 MHz
3300-3500 MHz
5650-5925 MHz
10.0-10.5 GHz ‡
24.0-24.25 GHz
47.0-47.2 GHz
76.0-81.0 GHz
122.25-123.0 GHz
134-141 GHz
241-250 GHz
All above 275 GHz
‡ No pulse emissions
Copyright © ARRL 2017 rev. 9/22/2017
Reproduced here with permission from the American Radio Relay League.





RADIO 59
.Broadcast Radio
Broadcast Radio
Radio broadcasting is a part of everyday life. We get up to the
sound of clock radios and listen to background music from
radio receivers during the day in our cars and homes. We in
the United States enjoy the widest variety of broadcasting
available anywhere in the world. No matter what you like,
there is a radio station to listen to, somewhere.
Radio broadcasting can be commercial (money-making)
or noncommercial. Commercial stations, as the name implies,
support themselves by the sale of advertising (“commercials”).
Noncommercial stations support themselves with fundraisers,
government grants, endowments, and financial contributions
from businesses, organizations, and individuals.
Commercial stations are businesses with paid employees,
but noncommercial stations can also have employees. Some
noncommercial stations, like those at colleges and universities,
operate with all-volunteer staff made up of students. Public
radio stations, like NPR (National Public Radio) or PRI (Public
Radio International), or religious broadcasting stations often
have both employees and volunteers.
FCC Broadcast Regulations
As noted earlier, the Federal Communications Agency
(FCC) issues and enforces regulations for all forms of radio
transmissions, including radio broadcasting. They issue licenses,
and assign frequencies and power levels.
For example, there are four classes of AM broadcast stations:
• Class A—unlimited-time broadcasting with no less
than 10 kilowatts and no more than 50 kilowatts of
transmitting power
• Class B—unlimited-time broadcasting with minimum power
of 250 watts and maximum of 50 kilowatts


60 RADIO
Broadcast Radio.
• Class C—unlimited-time broadcasting with minimum power
of 250 watts and no more than 1,000 watts
• Class D—can be restricted to daytime only or with lower
power levels at nighttime
A watt is a unit of power measurement. Typical
incandescent light bulbs use 60 watts. More efficient LED
bulbs put out an equivalent amount of light using only 5 watts
of power. A cellphone has just 0.5 watts of output power. So
you can see that radio broadcast stations can use quite a bit of
power for their transmissions.
FM broadcast stations have a similar classification system
that addresses coverage areas and power levels. Their power
can run from 6 kilowatts up to 100 kilowatts for effective
radiated power (ERP). This is calculated based on antenna
height and transmitter output power.
There is also a special low-power FM service with a
coverage range of 3.5 miles’ radius from the antenna and less
than 100 watts of power. This service is reserved for public
safety organizations or for noncommercial educational use such
as covering a college campus.
Frequencies for each broadcast station are assigned when
the FCC issues their license. This includes AM broadcasting
with assigned frequencies between 540 kHz and 1700 kHz. FM
broadcasting has assigned frequencies between 87.9 MHz and
107.9 MHz.
In addition, stations may be restricted in their coverage
area as noted later in this section. Complete rules and regula-
tions can be found online, with your parent or guardian’s per-
mission, at fcc.gov/media/radio/public-and-broadcasting.
Radio Station Program Formats
Every radio station has its own distinctive “sound,” or format.
As you think about the schedule for your imaginary station
with the call letters KBSA, you will have to decide what format
to follow. The main purpose of a radio station is to get and hold
an audience, and the audience will listen to your station only if
they know what to expect and like what they hear. Most of the
time, this means that all of the programming on your station
should have a certain sound.
What kind of sound? Radio programmers have come up
with names for certain types of station formats. Here is a look
at the more common formats.


RADIO 61
.Broadcast Radio
Rock stations come in many forms. Top 40 or “contempo-
rary hit radio” (CHR) stations mainly play popular or hit records.
Originally, the name “Top 40” referred to the fact that an
announcer or air personality (the old term was disc jockey or
DJ) could choose only from a list of 40 hit single records or
pop songs to play during a three-hour program. Top 40 stations
appeal to a relatively young audience. Some have air personali-
ties who move at a tremendous pace, speaking quickly and
loudly. They usually air many station promotion announcements
(SPAs or promos) and short, singing station identifications
(station IDs as jingles).
Rock formats other than Top 40 have evolved into
Metal—Heavy metal, very hard rock
Urban—Light hip-hop, R & B (rhythm and blues), etc.
Hip-hop—“New School” rap, some urban crossover
Classic rock—Older hard rock and classics from the 1970s
and ’80s
Oldies—Music from the 1960s, ’70s, and ’80s
Rhythmic—Dance music, some urban and hip-hop crossover
Progressive—Alternative, seldom heard or promoted by other
rock formats
Most stations in
all formats run
news at times
during the day,
most often on the
hour or half hour.
Radio news
services, such as
the Associated
Press, provide
national news to
stations without
news departments
of their own.


62 RADIO
Broadcast Radio.
Personalities from some stations are allowed to build their
own programs from an approved list of artists and groups that
fit the station’s format. For other air personalities, the station
provides a list of what music is to be played at what time.
Nostalgia format stations play music from the late 1940s
through today, if the style is light and sentimental. These stations
appeal to an older audience than do rock stations. They may
play adult contemporary music and soft rock, in a mix of old
favorite pop songs, rock and roll, and current releases.
Classical and jazz stations are concentrated mostly in
cities with large populations.
Country music is an increasingly popular format in
many parts of the United States.
News or talk radio stations broadcast all talk
with no music, up to 24 hours a day. “All news”
stations are located mainly in big cities. The news
may repeat hourly, or more often. (One station
advertises: “Give us 20 minutes and we’ll give
you the world.”) Sometimes features are sched-
uled multiple times each hour—“traffic on the
threes,” for example, where traffic reports are
given at 11:03, 11:13, 11:23, and so on.
The “talk radio” format became popular in
the late 1980s and remains the primary format on
the AM airwaves in many markets. Talk radio sta-
tions broadcast programs featuring air personalities,
guests, and calls from listeners. A given personality
Many stations in all formats are automated at least
during part of the day. That is, they don’t have live air
personalities. Instead, air personalities record the voice
parts earlier in the day or week, and an automation sys-
tem inserts those voice tracks (VTs) into the hourly mix
at the right time. The system makes the programming
sound like the air personality is really there. The programs
used in automation are almost always recorded onto a
computer. The music arrives at the station on special
CDs, on a satellite feed, or is downloaded off of radio
music websites specifically for radio stations.


RADIO 63
.Broadcast Radio
might have a particular political slant, or present medical or
legal advice, or help callers with problems with their lives,
gardens, or cars.
Most talk programs are syndicated, which means the
personality does the show at one location (usually one of the
big markets like New York or Los Angeles), and other stations
pick up the show from a satellite or internet feed. In many
cases the local stations schedule the program at a different time,
rather than broadcast it live.
Some stations broadcast especially to minority groups and
have ethnic programming, such as cultural shows in foreign
languages, or music from a particular country. Some stations
specialize in ethnic programming for many groups, with
Spanish programs following German programs, followed by
Polish programs, etc.
Dividing the Day: Time Blocks
Many radio stations break the day into blocks of hours
devoted to programs with different air personalities covering
their assigned shifts. Peak listening time for broadcast radio is
during the morning “drive time” (5:30 a.m. to 10 a.m.), as lis-
teners get ready for the day and commute to work or school.
Most listeners are busy working or studying during the midday
hours (10 a.m. to 2 p.m.), but many play their radios in the


64 RADIO
Broadcast Radio.
background. Many stations will schedule local news with a
live air personality during the morning and afternoon drive
time, even if most of the rest of the day is automated.
The afternoon drive time (2 p.m. to 7 p.m.) also is a high
listenership period when audiences are commuting home, doing
homework, and eating supper. The evening hours (7 p.m. to
midnight) find listeners relaxing and having fun. The overnight
hours (midnight to 5:30 a.m.) generally attract night owls and
third-shift workers.
Radio stations schedule programs for each of these periods
to appeal to the expected audience for that time block. Individual
programs might have names like “The J. Doe Show” or “A.M.
Edition.” Weekend programming usually offers specialty shows
in addition to formatted music. Programs may include listener-
requested music, blocks of music by particular artists, live
music, remote feeds from outside the station, artist interviews,
public affairs programs, countdowns of top songs, and more.
Besides dividing the day into blocks of hours filled by pro-
grams, stations break down each hour into segments. Times
are scheduled in the segments for various elements such as
news, weather, concert and event information, commercials,
announcements, and music sweeps (long sets of uninterrupted
music). The schedule looks much like one you would see for
a TV guide.


RADIO 65
.Broadcast Radio
Your KBSA Radio Station
Which radio format will you choose? You have to decide what
audience you want KBSA to attract. For Scout-age youth, Top
40 or progressive might be best, or perhaps country music or
urban might have wider appeal. Who will your air personality
be? What sort of format suits your personality’s personality?
Scheduling Commercials. Commercials are important to your
station. Radio stations have only one product to sell: time.
Selling time—usually 30 or 60 seconds at a time—is what pays
“We interrupt our program of dance music . . . ”
On Halloween Eve in 1938, entertainer Orson Welles
presented an on-the-air adaptation of H.G. Wells’
science-fiction novel, The War of the Worlds, as a
series of radio news bulletins. Thousands of listeners
panicked because they believed they were hearing
an actual Martian invasion of the United States. This
Mercury Theatre on the Air broadcast got more atten-
tion and publicity than any show in radio history.


66 RADIO
Broadcast Radio.
the bills. Commercials provide money for the station and pay
employee salaries. Many people who work in broadcast radio
don’t fully understand that they are in the business of creating
an audience to hear the messages from the sponsors.
Who are your sponsors? You will want to schedule their
commercials (spots) carefully. For instance, you wouldn’t want to
place competing advertisers, such as two different car manufac-
turers or beverage companies, next to each other during a stop
set (a break in the music). You wouldn’t want to put an ad for
Mom’s Pie Shop between ads for rat poison and insecticide—at
least, not if you want to keep Mom’s Pie Shop as a client.
Will your announcer read the commercials, or will the
voiceover and production be done by an outside ad agency?
Most commercials run exactly 30 seconds or 60 seconds.
Be careful not to let the DJ start talking before an ad is over.
Scheduling News. Use some lined paper to divide a half-hour
program by minutes. When will your station run its news, at the
beginning or end of the period? On the quarter hour? How long
will the news take?
Choose a few headlines from your local paper to make up
the program’s news segment. Read the headlines aloud to see
how many minutes you take to get through them. You don’t
want to leave long gaps of silence with nothing on the air
(called dead air). Do you want to have a special introduction
(intro) to the news, like the teletype sound effects many
stations use, or a musical introduction? Or should the announcer
just slide (segue) into the news from what was on before? Will
If your KBSA is a noncommercial station, you will
schedule underwriting credits instead of commercials.
Credits mention the sponsor’s name, event, or service
and may describe the product or service, but there
can be no “call to action” in the announcement. If
Rusty Auto Sales, for instance, sponsors a program
on your noncommercial station, the credit can’t
say, “Hurry down and buy a new car today from
Rusty Auto.” The message would be more along
the lines of “Rusty Auto Sales, purveyors of fine
automobiles, new and used. More information is
on the web at . . . ”


RADIO 67
.Broadcast Radio
you want to do a remote feed from outside the studio, like an
on-the-street report with a late-breaking news story?
Scheduling PSAs. It is important that your station run
public service announcements, or PSAs. While the FCC no
longer requires PSAs to be run once per hour, each station
must address a number of significant issues important to
the community, in the form of PSAs, news stories, or special
promotions. The station must report on those efforts to the
FCC several times a year, to tell the FCC how the radio station
is doing its “good turn” in trade for being allowed to use a
broadcast license.
Scheduling Music. You will want to schedule the music you
choose to be sure it will fit into the time you have. You can
easily check the length of a song if it’s on a compact disc (CD)
by placing the disc into a CD player that has a readout giving
the length. Lengths are listed in minutes and seconds, such as
3:29. Often the length of a song is printed on the CD itself or
in the booklet that comes with the disc.
Will your DJ talk over the fading end of the music (called
an “outro“) or just segue (fade) smoothly from one song to the
next in a sweep?
Be sure the music you choose matches your format and the
other music played. You may like both classical music and hip-
hop, but a quick cut from one to the other on the same
program may cause listeners to tune out—especially if your
format is beautiful music.
This public service announcement, or PSA,
comes from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia.
Vaccination is one of the best things you
can do to protect your children. Ask your doctor
or nurse if your children are up-to-date on their
immunizations. For more information call
1-800-CDC-INFO or visit cdc.gov/vaccines/.
This announcement is sponsored by [add your
organization here].
PSAs can be
made at the
station or can
come from
organizations like
the Advertising
Council. They
usually deal with
some matter of
interest to the
public, like
preventing drunk
driving or getting
voters to turn out
at election time.
How about
including a PSA
for Scouting
America?


68 RADIO
Broadcast Radio.
Station Identification. Be sure to identify your station. While
the FCC requires stations to give their call letters at the top of
every hour, most stations identify (ID) much more often than
they legally must. You will want people just tuning in to know
who you are.
You might have the DJ simply give your call letters
(“This is KBSA”), or use a slogan (“KBSA is the place to be”).
Some stations use their frequency as part of the ID (“93BSA is
it”) or set the ID to a jingle (“Up, up, and away, KBSA”). Use
your imagination.
Coverage Areas
Many stations, especially distant AM stations, will be happy
to receive reception reports from you—reports that you heard
them transmitting loud and clear. To fulfill the third require-
ment for the radio broadcasting option, you will log 15 stations
that you listened to, and determine the program format and tar-
get audience for five of the stations. Most stations will send a
QSL card or an advertising sheet giving their coverage area and
transmitting power. You can also look up the station location
and transmitting power in a guide such as the World Radio TV
Handbook (see the resources section in this pamphlet).
The FCC assigns each station a primary coverage area,
but the station’s signal may go much farther. Some AM sta-
tions, called clear-channel stations, are allowed to transmit
fairly high power (50,000 watts) on channels that are not
assigned to any other station in the same part of the country.
(The same channel may be assigned to another clear-channel
station thousands of miles away.) WCBS (New York) and KRVN
(Lexington, Nebraska) share clear-channel 880. More stations
are assigned regional AM channels like 910, and still more local
channels like 1450 kHz.
Many stations have a small coverage area and limited
power, like WLIX at 250 watts. Some AM stations are assigned
directional coverage areas, sometimes at certain hours of the
day. WHCU in Ithaca, New York, for example, must switch to a
directional pattern beamed north at night so as not to interfere
with other stations to the east and west on the same frequency.
FM stations are limited in range by the nature of the radio
frequencies on which they operate. FM channels are ranked by
the class of station (power and range) assigned to them. The


RADIO 69
.Broadcast Radio
lowest FM channels (88.1 to 91.9 MHz) are reserved for educa-
tional broadcasting, some (especially college stations) at powers
as low as 10 watts.
Other Broadcasting Platforms
Broadcasting is not limited to over-the-air transmissions.
There are many alternative broadcasting platforms including
internet streaming, satellite radio, and podcasts.
Many traditional radio broadcasters now stream their con-
tent simultaneously through the transmitter and online through
the station’s website. They may even offer ways to access their
programming via cell-phone apps. This way you can listen to a
station wherever you happen to be.
Satellites orbiting the Earth can also be used to transmit
programming. This approach has the advantage of providing
coverage for the entire country without listeners in different
geographical areas having to use different channels. Tune into a
satellite through a special receiver, and you can select whatever
channel you want. Many automobiles have satellite reception
built in along with the regular AM and FM receivers. However,
you do need to subscribe to a satellite service before you can
gain access.
Another method of distributing programming is via online
podcasts. An organization or an individual can prerecord their
program and offer it directly on their website or through a pod-
cast service. You can subscribe to receive each new podcast, or
you can browse to find topics of interest.
As you can see, there are many different ways to broadcast
programming, with more expected in the future.


70 RADIO
Broadcast Radio.
Broadcast Terms*
Here are some terms used in broadcasting.
AM (amplitude modulation). A method of combining an audio signal
with a radio carrier wave by varying the amplitude (strength) of the
carrier wave. See also FM.
AM broadcast band. This band extends from 535 kHz to 1605 kHz;
stations in this band use AM and are assigned frequencies every 10 kHz
starting at 540 kHz.
audio console or board. A piece of studio equipment that allows switch-
ing between audio sources, adjusting volume levels, and routing signals
for transmission or recording.
booth. Soundproofed room where the engineer sits. There is usually
a window between the studio where the air personality is working and
the booth, so that the engineer can see and signal to the personality
without sounds from the booth going out over the air.
clear channel. An AM broadcast band frequency assigned to only one
radio station in a large geographical area.
combo, combo operator. The combination of the announcing and
operating duties, performed by one person.
continuity. Transitional spoken or musical elements that keep a radio
program moving.
copy. A written script for news, spots, or announcements.
cross-fade. The transition between two program events, accomplished
by fading down one pot (volume control) while fading up another.
cue. A signal to begin an action or to prepare for airing.
cut. An abrupt transition from one sound or program element to another.
dB meter. Sound level meter, calibrated in decibels. See also VU meter.
dead air. Complete silence on the air; unmodulated carrier; generally an
undesirable situation.
digital radio or digital audio broadcasting (DAB). Radio transmissions
in which the audio signal is sent as a stream of numbers rather than
as an analog signal using AM or FM. The signal is digitally encoded,
so atmospheric noise and signal strength variations do not cause static.
Emergency Alert System (EAS), formerly Emergency Broadcast System.
A voluntary network of radio and television stations used to alert the
general public to any emergency affecting the safety of people or prop-
erty, and to announce information for Amber Alert lost child notifications.
*Many of these terms were taken from the book Skills for Radio Broadcasters (McGraw-Hill, 1988),
by Curtis R. Holsopple, with the author’s permission.


RADIO 71
.Broadcast Radio
fade. Gradual reduction of sound level from full volume to silence.
feed. A signal arriving at the station from somewhere else; could
be a “network feed” or a “remote feed” from an air personality at
a sports game or an advertiser’s location.
FM (frequency modulation). A method of combining an audio signal
with a radio carrier wave by varying the frequency of the carrier wave,
keeping the power constant. See also AM.
FM broadcast band. This band extends from 88.0 MHz to 108.0 MHz.
Broadcast stations in the FM band use FM transmission on frequencies
allocated every 0.2 MHz, starting at 88.1 MHz.
level. The loudness of an audio signal. “Give me a level” means to feed
program material or speak into the microphone so that the operator can
determine the proper volume setting on the board.
live. A broadcast where the creation of the program and its transmission
happen at the same time, as opposed to having been recorded earlier.
log. A “program log” shows the broadcast schedule and what was
actually broadcast. A “transmitter operating log” shows the transmitter’s
performance. A “maintenance log” contains notes about tests and
equipment adjustments to station equipment.
network. Interconnected radio stations receiving program material from
a central source.
playlist. A list of recordings to be played on the air.
pot (short for “potentiometer”). A volume control.
PSA. Public service announcement.
remote. Audio recorded or sent “on location”—that is, away from
the radio studio. Often a radio station will send an air personality to
“do a remote” from an advertiser’s location to promote a special event.
satellite radio. Radio signals that are broadcast from a satellite in space
to the listener, nearly always in digital form rather than conventional
AM or FM.
segue (pronounced SEG-way). Without interruption; to play two
recordings one after another with no silence or interrupting remarks.
sound bite. A short audio recording, most often used in news broadcasts
or talk radio, where the sound bite is a few words from the subject of
the news report.
VU meter. A meter used to measure the loudness or level of an audio
signal, usually calibrated in volume units, although it might also measure
sound levels in decibels (dB).





RADIO 73
.Shortwave and Medium Wave Listening
Shortwave and Medium
Wave Listening
“This is Radio Habana Cuba … China Radio International, CRI,
broadcasting from Beijing … News from London … Welcome to
WRMI, Radio Miami International … ”
“Com Sta Miami, this is Coast Guard Rescue 148 at Andros
Island, ETA Miami is 1300 hours. Have ambulance ready … ”
“ … American Airlines. Departing flight level 390 at 62 west.
Temperature minus 54. Turbulence nil … ”
“ … This is WOR in New York … Broadcasting from
New Orleans, this is WWL radio … XEW on the air from
Mexico City …
Tune a shortwave receiver through the radio frequency
bands and you will hear signals of all kinds. Some will be no
more than a harsh buzz or a musical squeal. Others will be
broadcasts from all over the world beamed at shortwave listeners.
Some of the signals you intercept will be conversations
between airliners over the Atlantic Ocean and air traffic
controllers in the United States, or mysterious code letters from
military or “spy” stations in unknown places. The Coast Guard
has many communications stations that can provide hours of
listening, and the ship-to-shore telephone links are always busy.
Code-Speak
Because no one outside the Navajo reservations could understand that
language, the Marines enlisted Navajos to help them encode military
messages during World War II. They developed a wordbook of 500 terms
and an encoded phonetic alphabet, which the Navajo “code talkers”
memorized. During the first two days of the U.S. attack on Iwo Jima, the
code talkers translated more than 800 messages from English to Navajo,
and back to English—without an error. The Navajo radio operators made
a major contribution to the U.S. victory, and their code was never broken.


74 RADIO
Shortwave and Medium Wave Listening.
Shortwave Broadcast Stations
Using relatively simple receivers, you can pick up many short-
wave broadcast (SWB) stations. These stations are fun to listen
to, and many shortwave listeners (SWLs) spend all of their
listening time on SWB stations.
These stations broadcast in every conceivable language,
often 24 hours a day. Some are religious in nature, some
present political viewpoints, and others are primarily for
entertainment. Each station tries to put the best face on its
country, and this can lead to fascinating comparisons. Listen
to the world news on the Voice of America, then follow with
China Radio International (Beijing), and finish up with Radio
Havana (Cuba). It may be hard to believe that those broadcasts
describe the same world.
The major SWB stations—such as the BBC, Voice of
America (VOA), and China Radio International (CRI)—each
transmit on many frequencies. You can usually find one of
those SWB stations on a band, and use that to judge the propa-
gation. The WWV signals can also be helpful.
You can find times and frequencies for stations
broadcasting in English at primetimeshortwave.com. You can
also find a complete listing of frequencies and times at
shortwaveschedule.com. If you need help identifying a signal,
you can enter the frequency into short-wave.info and get hints
who it might be. (Be sure to obtain permission from your
parent, guardian, or merit badge counselor before accessing
these and any other websites.)
Many SWB stations also offer streaming audio on their
websites, providing their news and messages without need of
transmitters, antennas, or receivers. In fact, you can use your
cellphone to listen to many of these broadcasts.
Medium Wave Broadcast Stations
The AM broadcast radio band extends from 535 to 1635
kHz. These broadcasts are meant to cover local and regional
areas during the daytime. At night, the signals from these sta-
tions can travel vast distances, so you may find stations from
hundreds or even thousands of miles away. This is called
medium-wave listening.
Medium-wave stations often need to reduce their power at
night to avoid interfering with each other’s signals. There are
also clear-channel stations on the AM band that are allowed to


.Shortwave and Medium Wave Listening
broadcast at high-power levels, even at night. You can hear
those stations from great distances as well.
Many hobbyists specialize in listening to medium-wave
broadcast stations. This can be a fun way to explore radio
stations across North America, hearing local news stories and
finding out about local events. You can plot out the stations
you hear on a map.
Techniques of Listening
For the Radio merit badge, you are required to listen to short-
wave stations for four separate periods, at least one period in
the daytime and at least one at night, so that you can compare
the difference in the radio bands between the two.
You are also required to listen to several medium-wave sta-
tions during two one-hour periods, one during daylight and one
at night. Again, you’ll be comparing the differences in distances
during daylight and nighttime, even plotting the stations on a
map to see the changes.
Although it isn’t required, you might find it interesting to
have one of the periods begin before local sunrise (or sunset)
and end afterward. The line of light (at sunrise) or of darkness
(at sunset) will approach from the east and proceed to the
west. Listen carefully to the effect of the line as it passes you.
What do you notice about stations you can hear, particularly
stations to the east and west, as the line approaches and
recedes? Check each band to see how the effect
changes with frequency. Look on a map or
globe and see if the stations you hear
are in light or darkness.
You should learn the tech-
niques of shortwave listening to
get the most from the hobby. Pick
a band and start at the lower
end. Tune slowly up the band,
stopping at each signal you hear.
Tuning slowly is especially
important if you are listening
for utility (nonbroadcast)
stations, since these
may not be on the air
all the time.


76 RADIO
Shortwave and Medium Wave Listening.
Once you hit the top of the band, go back to the beginning
and try again. You will be surprised how much you can pick
up on a second pass across a band. Then move to another band,
and come back later to try again as stations go on and off the
air (often on the hour and half-hour) and propagation changes.
Station IDs
Listen to each station long enough to identify (ID) it. If you
can’t make a positive ID after a reasonable period, make a note
of the frequency and try again later.
The best way to ID a station is to listen long enough to hear
the station identification. Stations often identify only on the hour
and half-hour, particularly medium-wave stations. With SWB
stations, even if you don’t understand the language, you may
be able to catch the ID. The word “radio” is the same in many
languages, and the place name is usually given in the station’s
“home” language. Several SWL handbooks give you the ID in the
languages most often used by the station, and also the theme
song or “interval signal” used by the station.
The interval signal is often transmitted for several minutes
before the station actually begins broadcasting, to hold the
frequency and warm up the transmitters. Listen for a short
phrase of music, repeated over and over. This is the signature
tune for that particular station.
The frequency you are receiving can also give you a
clue to the station. You can look up the frequency in a
good SWL guidebook or, with your parent or guardian’s permis-
sion, at shortwaveschedule.com. At least, it might give you
some idea of what you should be listening for.
How can you tell to whom you are listening? The language is not a good
clue, even if you can identify it. If you are listening to a shortwave radio
with your patrol some evening, you might hear Radio Taiwan in Spanish,
Radio Argentina in French, the Voice of Turkey in Spanish, one right after
the other—and not one would be speaking the native language of their
own country. The VOA broadcasts in more than 40 languages and is
heard by more than 180 million people worldwide each week. China
Radio International has a similar global audience and broadcasts in more
than 50 languages. So you can see, you will have many chances to hear
a variety of languages on a few stations.


RADIO 77
.Shortwave and Medium Wave Listening
As you listen to the bands, log the stations you hear and
identify them. (No fair entering an ID unless you’re sure!) You
should log the frequency, the date, the station ID and/or loca-
tion, the emission mode (AM/SSB/CW), and the signal quality.
Be sure to log time and date in 24-hour Coordinated Universal
Time (UTC), or “Zulu” time, rather than in your own local
time, since that is the standard used by all SWB stations.
The station’s local time would be best for medium-wave
broadcast stations.
The signal quality is usually given in SINPO code (instead
of the RST report that hams use). This code assigns a five-digit
number to the signal from 11111 to 55555. The digits represent
signal strength, interference, noise, propagation (fading), and
overall merit, with 5 being excellent and 1 being poor.
Don’t expect to identify a shortwave station based only
on frequency. Many frequencies are shared by more than one
station. Some stations change their frequencies regularly.
Sometimes a new station will spring up on top of an old station,
prompting the older station to move to avoid the interference.


78 RADIO
Shortwave and Medium Wave Listening..
On the other hand, medium-wave broadcasters are
assigned only one frequency. However, there may be several
stations assigned this frequency depending on their region and
power levels. Clearly, hearing their ID is critical.
Reception Reports
Log enough details about the program being transmitted so that
the station can confirm that you have, indeed, heard its signal.
This is called a reception report. You can send reception reports
to the broadcast stations you hear, and most of them will send
you a QSL card in return. Sometimes a station will invite
reports on the air and will give an address to write to, and
many stations have websites where you can submit a reception
report or contact them by email.
Unlike shortwave
stations, many
medium-wave sta-
tions do not offer
QSL cards, but
they can confirm
your reception via
email or even with
a letter. Check a
station’s website
for an email
address or a
physical address
for sending your
reception report.


RADIO 79
.Shortwave and Medium Wave Listening
Before spending time and money sending reception
reports and requesting QSL cards, study the guidelines issued
by listener clubs and some radio stations. You may send reports
to international broadcasters in the language of the broadcast
you heard, or in the station’s native language. Return postage
is often appreciated but not always necessary to receive a
QSL card. Offer some comments on the program to prove
that you really did listen to it. Use the SINPO code to indicate
reception quality.
Shortwave Bands for Listening
Shortwave broadcasting
5.9 to 6.2 MHz
7.2 to 7.45 (includes a portion of a
ham-radio band)
9.4 to 9.9
11.6 to 12.1 MHz
15.1 to 15.8 MHz
Aeronautical stations
4.65 to 4.75 MHz (all upper sideband, or USB)
5.4 to 5.73 MHz
6.525 to 6.765 MHz
8.815 to 9.04 MHz
11.175 to 11.4 MHz
Military and maritime stations
2.182 MHz (USB)—International distress frequency
5.696 MHz—Search and rescue
6.506.4 MHz—Coast Guard
8.9 to 9.0 MHz—Military aeronautical
More information on shortwave bands can be found at
en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shortwave_bands. Aeronautical
(aviation) bands are covered at en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Airband, and a listing of maritime frequencies is posted
at navcen.uscg.gov/?pageName=mtHighFrequency/. Be
sure to get your parent or guardian’s permission before
visiting websites.





RADIO 81
.Amateur Radio Direction Finding
Amateur Radio
Direction Finding
Amateur radio direction finding (ARDF) is an exciting
amateur radio activity that doesn’t require a license.
Using a receiver and a directional antenna you can find
transmitters hidden in a course laid out in a field or
forest, or a combination of both. Your goal is to
determine a strategy for locating all the transmitters
in a limited amount of time.
Once players in this activity leave the starting
line, they begin taking bearings toward the transmit-
ters they can hear. The bearings can then be plotted on
a detailed map. From there, you are off and running
toward the first transmitter, taking bearings regularly to
ensure you stay on the right track. When you arrive at the
transmitter, punch your card and head to start searching for the
next one. The player who finds the most transmitters is the
winner. Any tie decisions will go to the one who crossed the
finish line first.
ARDF—sometimes called “foxhunting” with the transmit-
ters serving as foxes—combines what you are learning about
radio (transmitters, receivers, antennas, and antenna radiation
patterns) with orienteering skills such as using a map and a
compass, and keeping track of your position while navigating
through challenging terrain. And all of this happens in the great
outdoors. Since it’s a timed event, ARDF requires running or
fast walking and strategically thinking through your route
around the course.
ARDF competitions are held across the country and inter-
nationally, including the USA ARDF Championships and the
World ARDF Championships. This means you can participate in
fun Scouting events and represent your state or country in a


82 RADIO
Amateur Radio Direction Finding.
competitive activity. It’s a great sport that mixes the outdoor
adventure of Scouting and orienteering with the technical
aspects of amateur radio.
ARDF Transmitters
“Foxhunting” requires “foxes” to find, and in this case they are
transmitters hidden in fixed locations on the course. You also
need radio receivers to hear the transmitters and a directional
antenna that can help you get a bearing on the direction of the
“foxes” from your location. Each bearing is then plotted on a
detailed map provided by organizers of the event. Where those
bearings cross on the map shows the likely fox locations.
A 2-meter receiver/antenna and transmitter
Normally, five transmitters are hidden on the course in an
ARDF event. Each transmitter will remain on the air exactly one
minute, sending its identifying number. The typical identifier
for numerals will be as follows: 1 = MOE (dah-dah, dah-dah-
dah, dit), 2 = MOI (dah-dah, dah-dah-dah, di-dit), and so on
up to MO5 (dah-dah, dah-dah-dah, di-di-di-di-dit) for number 5.
The transmitters will take turns sending for one minute
each and then repeat the sequence every five minutes. This
gives you the opportunity to take bearings on each transmitter
as you move around the course. Taking bearings from different
locations will help you get a better fix on the location of
each transmitter.
Then it’s up to you to determine how to locate each trans-
mitter in the shortest time possible. For example, does it make
sense to run first to the farthest transmitter and pick up the
Orienteering map and compass


RADIO 83
.Amateur Radio Direction Finding
others on your way to the finish? Or is there a bet-
ter path? You may also need to go around a lake or
stream, and this will dictate your route.
Once you have found a transmitter, you will
need to use the punch at the transmitter to punch
your competition card, or in some cases you may
have an electronic device that you can use to
record your arrival. The organizers will use your
card punches, or electronic records, to confirm that
you did find each transmitter.
There will also be a transmitter at the finish
line, called a homing beacon. It will transmit MO
(dah-dah, dah-dah-dah) in Morse code. You will use your map
and the homing beacon to locate the finish line.
ARDF Receivers and Directional Antennas
There are two frequency bands used in ARDF: 2
meters VHF (144 to 148 MHz) and 80 meters HF
(3.5 to 4.0 MHz). Of course the transmitters and
receivers must both operate on these same frequen-
cies, with only one frequency band in use for a
particular event.
The 2-meter VHF receivers can be amateur
radio handheld walkie-talkies with the transmit
function disabled, or handheld receivers tuned to
the frequency used by the transmitters. For the 80-meter HF
receivers, a simple tunable receiver is typically used along with
a directional loop antenna built into the receiver, forming a
single unit. You can build your own 80-meter receiver from a
purchased kit.
Yagi antennas are often homemade, using sections of a
tape measure for the elements of the antenna. Building your
own direction-finding antenna for 2 meters requires a tape
measure, PVC plumbing pipe, hose clamps, and a few tools.
Various antenna designs are available that you can use with
your counselor to build your own. The sample design on pages
85 and 86 is provided courtesy of Jeffrey Bail of nt1k.com.
Once you have built your antenna, test it out with your
receiver and a hidden “fox” transmitter.


84 RADIO
Amateur Radio Direction Finding.
Using Your ARDF Antenna
The front of the Yagi antenna has the shorter element length.
Pointing the front of the antenna directly at the transmitter will
provide the highest, or loudest, signal strength. Turning the
antenna from side to side will lower the received signal
strength. This will help you pinpoint the direction of the
hidden transmitter.
As you get closer to the hidden transmitter, you will
find that the signal becomes so loud you are having trouble
distinguishing the correct direction. When this happens, you
will need to reduce the sensitivity of the receiver by using an
attenuator or by tuning slightly off-frequency. Once you have
reduced the signal level enough, you will once again be able to
determine the correct direction toward the hidden transmitter.


RADIO 85
.Amateur Radio Direction Finding


86 RADIO
Amateur Radio Direction Finding.


RADIO 87
.Careers in Radio
Careers in Radio
As part of earning the Radio merit badge, you will visit a radio
installation. While there, be sure to ask about careers in radio.
Talk to any operators, technicians, or engineers you meet
about their positions, how they trained for the work,
what they like about it, and the skills they need.
Ask what education is required to pursue a
radio career.
Find out about ways to get experience.
If a career in broadcast radio is your
goal, maybe you can land an intern-
ship at a local radio station. Or, as
an amateur radio operator, you
might want a part-time posi-
tion in a store that sells and
services ham radio gear.
Your interest in ham radio,
shortwave radio, and electronics
could lead eventually to a career as
an electronics technician, for instance,
working on radio equipment. You might start
as a hobbyist, then move into a career in elec-
tronic consumer products, electronics technology,
or telecommunications.
Radio Station Staff Positions
Besides the air personality who plays songs and does the
announcing, many other people work at broadcast radio
stations. Other on-the-air personalities include news reporters,
sportscasters, weather reporters, commuter traffic reporters,
talk-show hosts, and commercial announcers.


88 RADIO
Careers in Radio.
Behind the mike are still other people, except in the
smallest stations.
The engineer maintains the station equipment and trans-
mitter and is responsible for making sure the station complies
with FCC regulations. It may be the engineer’s responsibility
to take transmitter readings from time to time to keep track of
the power and condition of the station’s transmitter. This
function can be computerized or done by the air
personalities in some stations.
The program director is responsible for the
“sound” of the station and chooses the right music
for the format, establishes lists of songs to be
played, and supervises the on-air personalities to
be sure the station follows its format. The program
director is responsible to the station management
for the success of the station.
The music director communicates with record label
companies about new music and gathers music sales reports
from retail stores. This individual listens to all new music
being sent to the station for air play, tracks and reports what
is being played on the station, and makes suggestions about
which new songs to add to the playlist or rotation.


RADIO 89
.Careers in Radio
The production director produces advertising and station
promotional spots and maintains the production studio.
The copywriter writes the commercial copy (the text or
words) for spots and may double as a newswriter.
Newswriters take news items from a news service and
rewrite them for the announcer to read.
The traffic director schedules all of the commercials.
This staff member also ensures that spots are produced and
aired according to the customers’ specifications.
The sales staff sells radio ads to advertisers and helps
plan advertising campaigns for the station.
The promotions department promotes the station
through advertising, contests, and special events.
Training for a Broadcasting Career
Colleges and technical schools around the country offer programs
in radio and television announcing, writing, and production.
Ask your counselor to help you find a college that suits your
interests. Many colleges and universities have student-run radio
stations that offer opportunities to gain experience, which can
be valuable in seeking a position in this competitive business.
Many professional stations have internships for students to earn
course credits while working and learning at a radio station.
Most announcers start out in small cities or minor stations,
hoping to work their way up to the major markets like New
York or Los Angeles or to a network. It isn’t easy to get ahead
in radio, but if you have talent and are willing to work hard, it
can be a rewarding career.





RADIO 91
.Radio Resources
Radio Resources
Scouting Literature
Digital Technology, Electricity, Electronics,
Emergency Preparedness, Energy,
Engineering, Geocaching, Orienteering,
Programming, Robotics, Search and
Rescue, Signs, Signals, and Codes, and
Space Exploration merit badge pamphlets
With your parent or guardian’s
permission, visit Scouting America’s
official retail site, scoutshop.org,
for a complete list of merit badge
pamphlets and other helpful
Scouting materials and supplies.
K2BSA
The non-profit K2BSA Amateur Radio
Association is dedicated to extending
the reach of amateur radio within the
Scout movement. To assist in this, they
provide a great deal of Radio Scouting
information for Amateur Radio
Operators, Scout leaders, and Scouts at
k2bsa.net.
Books and Other Resources
Many of the books, CDs, and other
resources listed here are available from
the American Radio Relay League.
See page 95 for contact information.
AMATEUR RADIO
The ARRL Ham Radio License Manual,
5th ed. ARRL Inc., 2022. A
beginners’ guide to amateur radio
and preparation for the Technician
Class ham-radio license exam.
Brownstein, Rob and Jim Talens.
Morse Code Operating for Amateur
Radio. ARRL Inc., 2013. Introduction
to Morse code along with
operating techniques.
Hallas, Joel, W1ZR. Basic Radio:
Understanding the Key Building
Blocks. ARRL Inc., 2005. An
introduction to radio with simple,
build-it-yourself projects.
Silver, H. Ward. Ham Radio for
Dummies, 4th ed. John Wiley &
Sons, 2021.
BROADCAST RADIO AND
SHORTWAVE LISTENING
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S.
Department of Labor. Occupation
Outlook Handbook. Bernan Press,
2022. See “Media and Communi-
cation,” at bls.gov/ooh/


92 RADIO
Radio Resources.
Chuday, Liz. National Association of
Broadcasters Guide to Careers in
Radio. 2nd ed. Thorough discussion
of each role within a radio broadcast-
ing station. Online at nab.org/
documents/radio/NABRadioCareers
SecondEdition.pdf
World Radio TV Handbook: The
Directory of Global Broadcasting.
WRTH Publications. Published
annually, a guide to the world
of radio including domestic
radio services and broadcasters
transmitting internationally.
AMATEUR RADIO
DIRECTION FINDING
Titterington, Bob, G3ORY; David
Williams, M3WDD; and David
Deane, G3ZOI. Radio Orienteering:
The ARDF Handbook. Radio Society
of Great Britain, 2007. Available
through arrl.org/shop/.
Homing In: The Art and Science of
Radio Direction Finding. Website
hosted by Joe Moell, K0OV, at
homingin.com
The Joe Leggio Tape Measure Antenna
on the Xenia Skywarn webpage:
xwarn.net/2022/01/04/joe-leggio-
wb2hol-tape-measure-antenna/
The Tape Measure Antenna. Webpage
by jcoman at instructables.com/
The-Tape-Measure-Antenna/
Acknowledgments
Jim Wilson, K5ND, for overall
coordination and writing
National Radio Scouting Committee for
their work in making suggestions
and reviewing the pamphlet: Mark
Abramowitz, NT3V; Bill Bode,
N4WEB; Doug Cook, KX5DC; Ed
Dudley, WA4ISA; Scott Hooper,
KTOP; Christian Ingerslev, AB2SN;
Keith Kaiser, WA0TJT; Frank
Kisselbach, W7PAQ; Frank Krizan,
K5HS; Grant Laughlin, W5XJ; Russ
Mickiewicz, N7QR; Brian Walker,
K9BKW; Gary Wilson, K2GW; Ron
Wood, K0BRO
Skip Arey, N2EI, for Shortwave and
Medium-Wave Listening review
and update
Michael Thorp for Radio Broadcasting
review and revision recommendations
For ARDF requirements development,
manuscript suggestions, and review:
Brian Coleman, KB0MAP; Dick
Arnett, WB4SUV; Joe Moell, K0OV;
Harley Leach, KI7XF; Marvin
Johnson, KE6HTS
Scouting America thanks the staff and
volunteers of the American Radio Relay
League for many contributions over the
years, and for those materials reprinted
with the permission of the ARRL from
its publications and website.
Acknowledgments are due to the
following for their contributions to
previous versions of the book, which
were incorporated into this revision:
Scott Hooper, KT0P; Mike Brown,
WB2JWD, Harford, New York, who


RADIO 93
.Radio Resources
coordinated the overall revision of 2008;
Bill Burns, WA6QYR, Ridgecrest,
California; Allan Koch, KA8JJN, Clinton
Township, Michigan; and Larry
Wolfgang WR1B, Newington,
Connecticut, for contributing to the
Amateur Radio section and related
portions of the pamphlet. Thanks to
Donald L. Perkins, N2IVW, operations
manager and engineer, Central New
York Radio Group, for his help in
revising the Broadcast Radio section.
Thanks also to Mike Brown,
WB2JWD, and Laurence A. Eichel,
K2NA, for the original 1989 version; and
to Rosalie White, K1STO; Mary Carcia,
N7IAL; Robin M. Micket, N1WAL; Karen
A. Leyton; Jean Wolfgang, WB3IOS; and
Labron Morgan of Westwood One,
Dallas, Texas, for their assistance with
the 1996 revision.
Scouting America is grateful to the
men and women serving on the
National Merit Badge Subcommittee for
the improvements made in updating this
pamphlet.
Photo and Illustration Credits
Amateur Radio on the International
Space Station (ARISS)—page 48
(NA1ss QSL card)
American Radio Relay League,
courtesy—page 57
Jeffrey Bail, NT1K—pages 85–86
Mike Brown, WB2JWD, courtesy—
page 26
Joe Moell—page 81
NASA, courtesy—page 40 (astronaut)
Pixabay.com, courtesy—pages 5 and 59
Stu Turner—page 84
Wikipedia.org, courtesy—pages 11
(shortwave receiver), 18, 20 (FCC
seal), 34 (cellphone tower, NOAA
logo), 42 (QSL card), 48 (Mongolia
QSL card), 52 (ARRL logo), 72
(boat), 82 (map and compass),
and 94
Jim Wilson—pages 9 (Scouts with direc-
tional antennas), 80, 82 (directional
antenna and transmitter), and
83 (both)
WMSC Radio, Montclair State
University—page 9
(broadcast console)
WZ6BSA, League of Gentleman
Scouters—page 54
All other photos and illustrations not
mentioned above are the property of
or are protected by Scouting America.
Evan H. Esaki—page 9
(boy on microphone)
Daniel Giles—pages 22, 44, and 53
F. Harvell—page 42 (ham operator)
Benjamin Kuo—page 3
John McDearmon—pages 14, 17, 24
(electromagnetic spectrum), 29–30
(all), 37, and 50
Brian Payne—page 23
Randy Piland—pages 63, 65, and
72 (main)
Emery Shepard—page 47 (boy speaking
into radio microphone)


94 RADIO
Radio Resources.
To the Radio Merit Badge Counselor
Thanks for your interest in introducing Scouts in your area to the wonders
of radio. The ARRL wants to help you make each Scout’s experience in
earning the Radio merit badge exciting, challenging, and fun. If you
would like ideas on JOTA, information about teaching for the amateur
radio license, or promotional brochures on Scouting and ham radio,
visit the ARRL website at arrl.org. Or, contact the ARRL for
more information:
Scouting
American Radio Relay League (ARRL)
225 Main St.
Newington, CT 06111
Telephone: 860-594-0200
The American Radio Relay League has signed a memorandum
of understanding with Scouting America. This MOU emphasizes
a cooperative and ongoing relationship to support mutually
beneficial programs that foster and promote education,
technical awareness, and achievement in amateur radio,
emergency preparedness and communications, and other joint
efforts and undertakings.


RADIO 95
.Radio Resources
Notes


Subscribe today at go.scoutlife.org/subscribe
Use promo code SLMBP15 to get a special
print + digital bundle offer priced just for Scouts!
Get ideas
for your next
merit badge
adventure in
every issue
of Scout Life
magazine.